[[
  [1997-10-03] transcribed original
  [1998-01-18] intro dialogue added
  [1998-09-25] some smaller corrections
  [1998-09-29] compared with tape, correcting errors
  [1998-09-30] arranged layout and added special characters
  [1998-10-01] checked all numbers of () [] {} »« match
  [1998-10-02] machine-parsed for capitalization errors
  [1998-10-05] machine-parsed for incorrect syllables (errors: 0)
  [1999-02-11] compared side 1 with tape, correcting errors added timed length
  [1999-02-14] compared side 2 with tape, correcting errors
  [2003-01-30] cleaned up text some
  [2006-07-25] added additional ISBNs to "Publisher" field, added day to release
               date (info from Amazon)
  [2016-09-10] many English spelling corrections (using `aspell`)
  [2016-09-11] re-wrapped text to 80 width of 80 columns
  Style: {}=bold, <>=italics

  Type: audio cassette / CD / audio download
  Date: (1 October) 1992
  Title: <Conversational Klingon>
  Author: Marc Okrand, presented by Michael Dorn
  Publisher: Audioworks, Simon & Schuster, London, ISBN 0-671-85316-3 (alternate
    ISBN 0-671-79739-5; Amazon audio download released 1 July 2004, ISBN
    074354269X)
  Summary: This audio cassette is a brief introduction to Klingon, intended for
    the tourist to the Empire. (Usually abbreviated <CK>.)

]]


  ****************************************************************************
****                                                                        ****
***                          CONVERSATIONAL KLINGON                          ***
***                              By Marc Okrand                              ***
***                                                                          ***
***                                                                          ***
***                    Recording, ©1992 Paramount Pictures                   ***
***                        49:36 Minutes Playing Time                        ***
***                                                                          ***
***                            ISBN 0-671-85316-3                            ***
***                        Simon & Schuster Audioworks                       ***
***                                 New York                                 ***
***                                                                          ***
***                                                                          ***
***                      Transcription, ©1997-2016 zrajm                     ***
***                          (For private use only.)                         ***
****                                                                        ****
  ****************************************************************************

I have attempted to proofread this text as thoroughly as possible, using both a
spell checking program and going over the text several times while listening to
the tape. However I am aiming to constantly improve the quality of this
transcription, and any comments, suggestions or questions are most welcome.
There are no markings as to what was spoken by whom on the tape.

The following characters have special meaning in this transcript:

   {...} Indicates a void you are supposed to fill with a Klingon phrase. (only
         used it the CK and PK transcriptions).
   *     surrounds any *emphasized* word (normally written in italics, also used
         for words that are transliterated rather than translated, such as
         *bat'leth* or *d'k tagh*).
   #     surrounds any #non-standard# or #incorrect# Klingon (used mostly for
         dialects or examples illustrating non-standard phonology or incorrect
         grammar).
   <>    signifies a phrase in English, that also is presented in Klingon.
   ""    are used for quotation marks. Usually there is a describing quote from
         the main text, when no direct translation is available in that source.
   {}    surrounds all Klingon words and phrases (normally written in boldface).
   [[.]] surrounds my own thoughts or opinions, or a general comment about
         something in the source (disturbing sound effect on the tapes,
         grammatical error, weird translation, whatever). Most often this
         comment is a simple source reference however.
   (?)   comes after words with uncertain spelling, or otherwise doubtful
         entries (mostly names spoken on the tapes, whose spelling I have been
         unable to confirm).

Special thanks for contributions go to:
   * Markus Persson, Sweden

/zrajm


   ==========================================
    SIDE ONE: [[24:50 Minutes Playing Time]]
   ==========================================

{tujqu'choH QuQ.}
   [[<The engine is overheating.> (TKD p.170)]]

{nughoS jagh.}
   [[<The enemy is approaching.>]]

{chay' jura'?}
   [[<What are your orders?> (TKD p.170)]]

{Qu'vatlh!}
   [[<#*@!!>]]

{batlh maHegh.}
   [[<We will die with honor.>]]

{cha yIghuS!}
   [[<Get the torpedoes ready.> (ST1)]]

{So'wI' yIchu'Ha'!}
   [[<Deactivate the cloaking device!> (ST3)]]

{baH!}
   [[<Fire!> (ST1, ST3, TKD 7.1, p.72)]]

{bIjeghbe'chugh vaj bIHegh.}
   [[<Surrender or die.> (TKD p.170)]]

{tlhIngan maH.}
   [[<We are Klingons!>]]

Until recently members of the Federation did not know much about the Klingon
language beyond how it was used during battles. After all it was not all that
long ago that hostilities between the Klingon Empire and the United Federation
of Planets ceased. Although you would think that an interchange of ideas,
culture and traditions would have started right away, Terrans in particular were
at first a little reluctant to visit Klingon planets. But as news spread about
the stunning natural settings, and truly fascinating customs, tourism and trade
have begun to boom. The Klingon Empire has become such an important player in
intergalactic commerce that Klingon will soon fulfill the language requirement
at a number of Federation universities. Although linguists have been studying
Klingon for some time, no-one has prepared a course specifically for tourists
planning a visit to the Klingon Empire.

This tape should begin to fill that void. By listening and repeating the Klingon
phrases you hear, you will quickly learn what you need to know to get by on any
visit to the Empire. Correct pronunciation of the words, elementary grammar and
some useful expressions. Also, since language is the key to any culture you will
begin to become familiar with the richness of Klingon traditions and believes.
This course is a practical one, you will be exposed to everyday Klingon words,
and phrases, that travelers find most useful. This is only an introduction, but
if you apply yourself, you will be well prepared for many adventures.

As you practice speaking, remember, speak Klingon *boldly*, do not be meek or
hesitant, this could be interpreted as a sign of weakness, a less than admirable
trait among Klingons. Also, some of the sounds are difficult to tell apart if
you do not speak up. A final word of warning, expectoration, or spitting, is a
common side-effect of speaking Klingon. Until you are used to it, keep a napkin
or handkerchief nearby.

Now, <Are you ready to study Klingon?> {tlhIngan Hol DaHaDrup'a'.}

<Good> {maj.}

<Pay attention!> and <Concentrate!> {yIqIm. yIbuS.}

<Success!> {Qapla'.}

Let us start with pronunciation. Most Klingon sounds will be easy for you to
say, they do not differ much from Federation Standard. On the other hand a few
are a little tricky, to learns these sounds, we will study some offensive
Klingon words. Keep in mind that Klingon cursing is considered a fine art, a
highly prized verbal skill. Those who have gained a mastery of this segment of
Klingon vocabulary are greatly admired. At this point, do not concern yourself
with the exact translations of these words. If you spend time with Klingons you
will hear them often enough and context will make the meanings quite clear. For
now, just concentrate on pronouncing them correctly.

Okay, here's our first word. This is something you might hear someone say in
moments of extreme anger:
   {Qu'vatlh}

Be concerned if you hear it, but say it correctly if you say it. The word begins
with the common Klingon sound {Q}. To make this sound, put the back of your
tongue as far back into your mouth as you can, then force the air up harshly, as
if you're trying to dislodge a piece of food. Listen:
   {Q}, {Q}, {Q}.

Now say it along with me:
   {Q}, {Q}, {Q}.

And now listen to the word again:
   {Qu'vatlh}

Did you hear the sounds cut off abruptly in the middle of the word? The correct
pronunciation is {Qu'vatlh}, not {#Quvatlh#}. This abrupt cut-off is a *very
common* feature of Klingon, you'll hear it *a lot*. Now here's the word, one
more time, listen particularly to the last sound in the word.
   {Qu'vatlh}

To make this {tlh} sound say a "t" and at the same time whisper, loudly, but
still just whisper, an "l". Listen:
   {tlh}, {tlh}, {tlh}.

Now try it along with me:
   {tlh}, {tlh}, {tlh}.

Do you feel the sides of your tongue going down as you say the sound? -- You
should. Now you're ready to say the full word. Repeat it after you hear it the
second time:
   {Qu'vatlh}
   {Qu'vatlh}
   {...}

This next word is something one Klingon would call another, if they weren't on
the best of terms.
   {toDSaH}

The sound at the end of the first syllable of this word, {toD}, is {D}. To make
this sound, point the tip of your tongue directly upward, and touch the hard
part of the roof of your mouth, and then do the same thing you would do to make
a "d" sound. Do it along with me:
   {D}, {D}, {D}

Now listen to the word again, focusing on the second syllable:
   {toDSaH}

The sound at the beginning of the second syllable, {SaH}, is {S}. It's not
quite either the "s" or the "sh" sounds you're familiar with. For the
Klingon {S}, put your tongue in the same place you did to make the {D}
sound, and say it with me:
   {S}, {S}, {S}.

Here's the word, one more time, listen to the very end.
   {toDSaH}

The last sound in the word is {H}, this is the same as the sound at the end of
the name of the ancient Terran composer "Bach". You make it the same way you'd
make a "k" sound, but force air out of your mouth at the same time. Say it along
with me:
   {H}, {H}, {H}.

Now you can say the whole word. Repeat it after you hear it the second time.
   {toDSaH}
   {toDSaH}
   {...}

Here's another word with strong force. A Klingon might say it after receiving an
unsettling communiqué. It's a lot stronger that the Terran "Darn it!"
   {ghuy'cha'}

The first sound of the word is {gh}. It's the same as the last sound of
{toDSaH}, but hum while you say it. Say it with me:
   {gh}, {gh}, {gh}.

This word also has that abrupt cut-off of sound that you heard in {Qu'vatlh},
but it has it at the end as well. Listen:
   {ghuy'cha'}.

The correct pronunciation of this word is {ghuy'cha'}, not {#ghuycha#}.
Sometimes the abrupt cutting off of the sound is the only way to distinguish one
word from another, listen to these two words:
   {tI} -- {tI'}

The first word means <vegetation>, the second means <to repair>. Listen again:
   {tI} -- {tI'}

Hear the difference? Now you try it. Repeat after me:
   {tI} -- {tI'}
   {...}

Good. Now you can say the Klingon curse. Once again, repeat it after you hear it
the second time:
   {ghuy'cha'}
   {ghuy'cha'}

If you call someone this next word, stand back. This is *a classic* insult:
   {taHqeq}

There's a new sound at both the beginning and end of the second syllable {qeq},
be careful, this is not the Federation Standard "k" sound. You make it like a
"k" but as you did for {Q}, shove the back of your tongue as far back into your
mouth as you can. Listen:
   {q}, {q}, {q}.

Now say it along with me:
   {q}, {q}, {q}.

Now repeat the whole word, after you hear it the second time.
   {taHqeq}
   {taHqeq}
   {...}

<Good.> {maj.}

Now you have learned to pronounce the difficult Klingon sounds, and you have
also been introduced to the highly regarded custom of Klingon cursing. You
probably need a rest. This might be a good time to replenish your napkin supply.
Let us take a <short break>, a {lenHom}.

[[# mark #]]

<Start studying again!> {yIHaDqa'.}

Before getting into even elementary grammar, you should learn some basic
everyday expressions, so that you can start talking right away. First, here are
some really simple, but important words. Repeat each one after you hear it the
second time. Okay? Here we go:

<Yes.>
   {HIja'.}
   {HIja'.}
   {...}

<No.>
   {ghobe'.}
   {ghobe'.}
   {...}

<Okay.> in the sense of <Okay, I'll do it.>
   {lu'.}
   {lu'.}
   {...}

Now, for some phrases. Remember, the Klingon culture is a very direct one and
most of the time the social niceties of Terrans are considered just superfluous.
Unlike other peoples, Klingons do not use everyday expressions such as:
<Please.> <Excuse me.> <Thank you.> and alike. In dealing with Klingons, just
state your business, no more, and no less. This is not considered impolite or
crude. The directness of Klingon interactions extends to their greetings, there
is *only one*:
   {nuqneH.}
   {nuqneH.}
   {...}

Literally this means <What do you want?> To Terrans this may seem a tactless way
to begin a conversation, but among Klingons it is considered quite civil.

Enough of the formalities. Let's move on to simple questions. The word for
<who?> is:
   {'Iv.}
   {'Iv.}
   {...}

For example: <Who are you?>
   {SoH 'Iv.}
   {SoH 'Iv.}
   {...}

Next: <What?>
   {nuq.}
   {nuq.}
   {...}

<What is this?>
   {Dochvam nuq.}
   {Dochvam nuq.}
   {...}

<Where?>
   {nuqDaq.}
   {nuqDaq.}
   {...}

<Where is the bathroom?>
   {nuqDaq 'oH puchpa''e'.}
   {nuqDaq 'oH puchpa''e'.}
   {...}

<When?>
   {ghorgh.}
   {ghorgh.}
   {...}

<When do we leave?>
   {ghorgh mamej.}
   {ghorgh mamej.}
   {...}

<Why?>
   {qatlh.}
   {qatlh.}
   {...}

<Why is he angry?>
   {qatlh QeH.}
   {qatlh QeH.}
   {...}

<How many?> or <How much?>
   {'ar.}
   {'ar.}
   {...}

<How many guards are coming?>
   {mughoS 'avwI' 'ar.}
   {mughoS 'avwI' 'ar.}
   {...}

<How much fuel do we have left?>
   {nIn 'ar wIghaj.}
   {nIn 'ar wIghaj.}
   {...}

Next, here are some phrases that you'll probably use a lot, so it's worth
learning them well. First:

<Do you speak Federation Standard?>
   {DIvI' Hol Dajatlh'a'.}
   {DIvI' Hol Dajatlh'a'.}
   {...}

<I don't speak Klingon.>
   {tlhIngan Hol vIjatlhbe'.}
   {tlhIngan Hol vIjatlhbe'.}
   {...}

<I understand.>
   {jIyaj.}
   {jIyaj.}
   {...}

<I don't understand.>
   {jIyajbe'.}
   {jIyajbe'.}
   {...}

Finally, just to get you going, a few common words, in pairs:

<Big> -- <Small>
   {tIn} -- {mach}
   {tIn} -- {mach}
   {...}

<Early> -- <Late>
   {'eq} -- {paS}
   {'eq} -- {paS}
   {...}

<Near> -- <Far>
   {Sum} -- {Hop}
   {Sum} -- {Hop}
   {...}

<Hot> -- <Cold>
   {tuj} -- {bIr}
   {tuj} -- {bIr}
   {...}

<Cheap> -- <Expensive>
   {qutlh} -- {wagh}
   {qutlh} -- {wagh}
   {...}

<Good> -- <Bad>
   {maj} -- {qab}
   {maj} -- {qab}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: The opposite of {qab} is {QaQ} <be good>, *not* {maj}. The
reason that {maj} to occurs here is, of course, its frequent use throughout the
tape, but {maj} really means <good> only when expressing satisfaction. -- A bit
like saying <I am satisfied.>]]

Okay, that will do for preliminaries. With what you have learned so far, and by
pointing, you should be able to get by, but if you want to do more than just
*get by* you will have to learn some grammar. So next, listen to this short
dialogue. When it is over, we will review it, for pronoun use.

In this dialogue a Klingon warrior and a Terran tourist strike up a
conversation. Now <Pay attention!> {yIqIm.} Listen for pronouns.

<What do you want?>
   {nuqneH.}

<Are you a Klingon?>
   {tlhIngan SoH'a'.}

<Yes.>
   {HIja'.}

<I'm a Terran.>
   {tera'ngan jIH.}

See? That was pretty short. You may have a little trouble pronouncing the word
for <Terran>, listen to it again:
   {tera'ngan}
   {tera'ngan}
   {...}

The sound at the beginning of the second syllable, {ngan}, is the same as the
sound that comes at the end of the word <thing> or <hang>. Let's practice it
together:
   {ng}, {ng}, {ng}.

Listen once more:
   {tera'ngan}
   {tera'ngan}

Now you say it:
   {tera'ngan}
   {tera'ngan}
   {...}

Not bad! While listening to the conversation, were you able to pick out the
pronouns? In Klingon there are eight of them:

<I>
   {jIH}
   {jIH}
   {...}

<You>
   {SoH}
   {SoH}
   {...}

<He> or <she>
   {ghaH}
   {ghaH}
   {...}

<It>
   {'oH}
   {'oH}
   {...}

<We>
   {maH}
   {maH}
   {...}

<All of you>
   {tlhIH}
   {tlhIH}
   {...}

<They> referring to beings:
   {chaH}
   {chaH}
   {...}

And finally <they> referring to things:
   {bIH}
   {bIH}
   {...}

Okay. Now let's use some of the pronouns in sentences. Repeat each sentence
after you hear it the second time.

<I am a Klingon.>
   {tlhIngan jIH.}
   {tlhIngan jIH.}
   {...}

<You are a Klingon.>
   {tlhIngan SoH.}
   {tlhIngan SoH.}
   {...}

<He is a Terran.>
   {tera'ngan ghaH.}
   {tera'ngan ghaH.}
   {...}

<She is a Terran.>
   {tera'ngan ghaH.}
   {tera'ngan ghaH.}
   {...}

Notice that there was no difference in the way to say <he> and <she>.

<Good.> {maj.}

You may have noticed, that in each of the examples, the pronoun comes at the
end. Some Terrans find this confusing, but for a Klingon the order is quite
natural. Get used to it!

The full system of Klingon pronouns is quite complicated. There is another set
used just to express states, or qualities, there are only four of these
pronouns, and unlike the words you just learned, they come at the beginning of
an expression.

These pronouns are:

<I>
   {jI-}
   {jI-}
   {...}

<You>
   {bI-}
   {bI-}
   {...}

<We>
   {ma-}
   {ma-}
   {...}

<All of you>
   {Su-}
   {Su-}
   {...}

For <he>, <she>, <it> and <they> say nothing at all. Now, let's put these
pronouns into sentences:

<I'm hungry.>
   {jIghung.}
   {jIghung.}
   {...}

<You're right.>
   {bIlugh.}
   {bIlugh.}
   {...}

<He is late.>
   {paS.}
   {paS.}
   {...}

The word for <late> is {paS}. Notice that nothing here's added to indicate <he>.
To say <He is late.> just say {paS.}

<She is early.>
   {'eq.}
   {'eq.}
   {...}

Again, the word for <early> is {'eq}, and there is no special pronoun added for
<she>. This is also the case for <it> and for <they>.

<We're thirsty.>
   {ma'oj.}
   {ma'oj.}
   {...}

<All of you are boring.>
   {SuDal.}
   {SuDal.}
   {...}

<They're sloppy.>
   {ghIH.}
   {ghIH.}
   {...}

<Well done.> {majQa'.}

Next, we will move on to more questions. As a tourist you will probably need to
ask questions frequently. Be careful not to ask to many questions at once
though. Klingons are suspicious by nature and they may begin to wonder about
your motivations. To form a question whose answer is <yes> or <no>, just add
{-'a'}.

In this dialogue a Terran tourist has just arrived on Kronos, or {Qo'noS}, the
home planet of the Klingon Empire. At the customs gate a guard is questioning
him. <Pay attention!> {yIqIm.}

<Are you a Terran?>
   {tera'ngan SoH'a'.}

<Yes. I'm a Terran.>
   {HIja'. tera'ngan jIH.}

<Are you vacationing on Kronos?>
   {Qo'noSDaq bIghIQ'a'.}

<Yes. I am vacationing on Kronos.>
   {HIja'. Qo'noSDaq jIghIQ.}

<Do you know anyone here?>
   {naDev vay' DaSov'a'.}

<No. I don't know anyone here.>
   {ghobe'. naDev vay' vISovbe'.}

<Are you transporting tribbles?>
   {yIHmey DIHIj'a'.}

[[Transcriber's note: Sic! As far as I can hear Okrand is really saying
{DIHIj'a'} <Are we transporting them?> though this really should be {DaHIj'a'.}
<Are you transporting them?>.]]

<No. I'm not transporting tribbles.>
   {ghobe'. yIHmey vIHIjbe'.}

It's okay to answer questions like these by simply saying <yes> {HIja'} or <no>
{ghobe'} and nothing more. But don't answer any question unless you're sure you
understand what it means. Dire consequences could result from an inappropriate
response. If you don't understand a question, just say {nuqjatlh.} This is a
very useful expression, it means <What did you say?> or <Huh?>. You try it.
Repeat it after you hear it the second time:
   {nuqjatlh.}
   {nuqjatlh.}
   {...}

That is close. You should probably practice saying this word, until you are
comfortable with it, it is another one you will probably use quite a bit. Now
<Relax!> {yIleS.}

<Stop relaxing!> {yIleSHa'.}

We are moving on to numbers. As in Federation Standard the basic count in
Klingon is one to ten. Long ago Klingons counted by threes, so the number after
three was literally <three plus one>, for <seven> they would say <two threes
plus one> and so on. Fortunately for us, over time, the system changed, probably
due to interactions with other worlds and a desire to learn about advanced
technology. In any event, counting should not be too hard for you. Ready? Here
we go:

<One>
   {wa'}
   {wa'}
   {...}

<Two>
   {cha'}
   {cha'}
   {...}

<Three>
   {wej}
   {wej}
   {...}

<Four>
   {loS}
   {loS}
   {...}

<Five>
   {vagh}
   {vagh}
   {...}

<Six>
   {jav}
   {jav}
   {...}

<Seven>
   {Soch}
   {Soch}
   {...}

<Eight>
   {chorgh}
   {chorgh}
   {...}

<Nine>
   {Hut}
   {Hut}
   {...}

<Ten>
   {wa'maH}
   {wa'maH}
   {...}

Numbers, of course, are used to count things, and when there is more than one
thing, there are plurals. There are three ways to make plurals in Klingon.
First, to form the plural of a word like <Klingon>, just add {-pu'} to the word.
The suffix {-pu'} is used only to form the plural of beings that can use
language.

One <Klingon> is:
   {tlhIngan}

Two or more <Klingons> are:
   {tlhInganpu'}

A single <Terran> is:
   {tera'ngan}

Two or more are:
   {tera'nganpu'}

For body parts, use {-Du'}:

A single hand is:
   {ghop}

More than one hand is:
   {ghopDu'}

To form the plural of something that neither speaks nor is a body part, use
{-mey}.

A single <phaser> is:
   {pu'HIch}

More than one phaser is:
   {pu'HIchmey}


   ==========================================
    SIDE TWO: [[23:20 Minutes Playing Time]]
   ==========================================

Now, we'll put the numbers and plurals together. Repeat each phrase after you
hear it the second time. Let's count:

<One Klingon>
   {wa' tlhIngan}
   {wa' tlhIngan}
   {...}

<Two Klingons>
   {cha' tlhInganpu'}
   {cha' tlhInganpu'}
   {...}

<Three *brave* Klingons>
   {wej tlhInganpu' yoH}
   {wej tlhInganpu' yoH}
   {...}

<Four phasers>
   {loS pu'HIchmey}
   {loS pu'HIchmey}
   {...}

<Five phasers>
   {vagh pu'HIchmey}
   {vagh pu'HIchmey}
   {...}

<Six *big* phasers>
   {jav pu'HIchmey tIn}
   {jav pu'HIchmey tIn}
   {...}

<Seven foreheads>
   {Soch QuchDu'}
   {Soch QuchDu'}
   {...}

<Eight *beautiful* foreheads>
   {chorgh QuchDu' 'IH}
   {chorgh QuchDu' 'IH}
   {...}

<Nine tribbles>
   {Hut yIHmey}
   {Hut yIHmey}
   {...}

<Ten *useless* tribbles>
   {wa'maH yIHmey lI'be'}
   {wa'maH yIHmey lI'be'}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: The TKD (p.50) explicitly notes that "[...] when used to
modify the noun in this way, [a verb] can have no other suffix except the rover
{-qu'} <emphatic>." Either this is an error, an exception to the rule, or a new
rule. Go figure that out!]]

Sometimes you will need to use larger numbers. For multiples of <ten>, like
<twenty>, <thirty> and so on, add {-maH}. For example <twenty> is <two> {cha'}
plus {-maH}, {cha'maH}. For hundreds, add {-vatlh}. For example <five hundred>
is <five> {vagh} plus hundred {-vatlh}, {vaghvatlh}. For thousands, add {-SaD}.
<Three thousand> is <three> {wej} plus <thousand> {-SaD}, {wejSaD}.

You try some. Repeat the large number after you hear it the second time:

<Forty>
   {loSmaH}
   {loSmaH}
   {...}

<Seven hundred>
   {Sochvatlh}
   {Sochvatlh}
   {...}

<Nine thousand>
   {HutSaD}
   {HutSaD}
   {...}

Finally, the word for <zero>:
   {pagh}
   {pagh}
   {...}

{maj.} Now you are ready for higher mathematics. You are also ready to tell
time. Klingons have adopted the way most civilized planets in the Galaxy tell
time, they have twenty-four hour days. <Zero hours> means midnight, <twelve
hundred hours> means noon, <nineteen hundred hours> means seven p.m., and so on.
Klingons pride themselves on punctuality, so it is important to be precise when
referring to time. Though Klingons are sometimes inaccurate, they are *never*
approximate.

The word for <hour> in Klingon is {rep}. <Six hundred hours> or six o'clock in
the morning is <six> {jav} plus <hundred> {-vatlh} plus {rep}, altogether it's
{javvatlh rep}.

Now, you repeat these time expressions, after you hear each one the second time:

Noon or <twelve hundred hours>:
   {cha'maH wa'vatlh rep}
   {cha'maH wa'vatlh rep}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: {cha'maH wa'vatlh rep} is quite obviously wrong, as it
means <twenty one hundred hours>, this was duly noted by (among others) Neal
Schermerhorn in {HolQeD} 2:3 (page 14). The sentence should have been {wa'maH
cha'vatlh rep}.]]

Midnight or <zero hours>:
   {pagh rep}
   {pagh rep}
   {...}

Seven p.m. or <nineteen hundred hours>
   {wa'maH Hutvatlh rep}
   {wa'maH Hutvatlh rep}
   {...}

Although Klingons tell time the way most of the rest of the Galaxy does, the
Klingon day really goes from dawn to dawn, rather than from midnight to
midnight. You might think this could cause some confusion, but it is really
comparable to when a Terran says something like, <Thursday night, at three
o'clock in the morning>. Bearing that in mind here are the words for
<yesterday>, <today> and <tomorrow>:

<Yesterday>
   {wa'Hu'}
   {wa'Hu'}
   {...}

<Yesterday I was hungry.>
   {wa'Hu' jIghung.}
   {wa'Hu' jIghung.}
   {...}

<Today>
   {DaHjaj}
   {DaHjaj}
   {...}

<Today I am thirsty.>
   {DaHjaj jI'oj.}
   {DaHjaj jI'oj.}
   {...}

<Tomorrow>
   {wa'leS}
   {wa'leS}
   {...}

<Tomorrow I'll be tired.>
   {wa'leS jIDoy'.}
   {wa'leS jIDoy'.}
   {...}

<Well done.> {majQa'.}

Now, for a moment <You should relax!> {yIleS.}

[[# mark #]]

<Back to work!> {yIvumqa'.}

When visiting a Klingon planet the first thing you will want to do, once you
have finish answering the guards questions, is rent a room. No matter where you
stay the accommodations will be stark compared to what you are used to. Klingons
are predisposed to rejecting anything whose sole function is physical comfort.
They will, however, make some concessions for visitors. For example, your room
will almost certainly be equipped with a bed, though it is likely to be made of
the same material as the floor. Checking into your room is a painless procedure,
as long as you have made reservations ahead of time. Simply identify yourself to
the desk clerk. Here is a typical scene: {yIqIm.}

<What is your number, Terran?>
   {nuq mI'lIj, tera'ngan.}

<I'm guest number forty-two.>
   {meb loSmaH cha' jIH.}

<We're expecting you.>
   {pIpIH.}

<Your room is number twenty-three.>
   {pa' cha'maH wej 'oH pa'lIj'e'.}

<The bed is very hard.>
   {letqu' QongDaq.}

<The room has no view.>
   {pa'vo' pagh leghlu'.}
   [[Lit. <Nothing is seen from the room.> TKD p.39]]

<Check-out time is five a.m.>
   {vagh rep bImejnIS.}
   [[Lit. <You need to leave at five hours.>]]

<Pay now!>
   {DaH yIDIl.}

<Pick up your baggage and go to your room!>
   {teplIj yIwoH 'ej pa'lIjDaq yIjaH.}

In the hotel you will have to do everything yourself. Do not expect to find
housekeeping or room service either, while this may be a little inconvenient, it
is also inexpensive. There is never any need to tip.

As accommodating as it is, you will not want to spend all of your time in your
room. You might want to get out and go shopping. As you look into various stores
you will soon discover that there is very little to buy except for food and
weapons, and these for the most can not be taken out of the Empire. If somehow
you find something you are permitted to buy, such as food you can eat right
away, you will need to know how to ask only one question: <How much?> {'ar.}

The answer to this question will be the number of credits needed to purchase the
item. For example: <one credit> {wa' DeQ}.

There is no haggling, there is also no browsing. A common saying among Klingon
merchants is <Buy or die.> {bIje'be'chugh vaj bIHegh.}

If a merchant says this to you, spending a few credits to buy the first thing
you see is probably a good idea. Instead of shopping, try spending the day
visiting interesting sites. Even though tourism has become a part of everyday
life and is encouraged by the government, Klingons are still a little uneasy
about visitor wandering around freely. If you want to see anything you will have
to take a tour. The next dialogue contains some phrases which will be useful
when you go sightseeing. {yIqIm.}

<I want to visit some place.>
   {vogh vISuch vIneH.}

<I want to visit the Great Hall of the High Council.>
   {yejquv vaS'a' vISuch vIneH.}

<I want to visit the dilithium mines.>
   {cha'puj tlhIlHal vISuch vIneH.}

<These places are nearby, Terran.>
   {Sum Daqmeyvam, tera'ngan.}

<Can I walk there?>
   {pa' jIyIt'a'.}

<No. You must ride the jitney.>
   {ghobe'. lupwI' DalIghnIS.}

<Get in and stand there!>
   {yIyong 'ej pa' yIQam.}

<I can't see well from here.>
   {naDevvo' jIleghlaHchu'be'.}

[[Transcriber's note: {naDevvo' jIleghlaHchu'be'.} literally means something
like <From here, I can see, but not perfectly.> Neal Schermerhorn suggested (in
{HolQeD} 2:3 p.14) that a better translation might be {naDevvo'
jIleghlaHbe'chu'.} literally <From here, I can perfectly not see.> I disagree
with this opinion.]]

<We're passing a power generator.>
   {HoS lIngwI' wIjuS.}

<It's beautiful, isn't it?>
   {'IH, qar'a'.}

<Now I can smell something.>
   {DaH vay' vIlarghlaH.}

<My eyes sting.>
   {mu'aw' mInDu'wIj.}

[[Transcriber's note: {mu'aw' mInDu'wIj.} literally means <My eyes sting me.>
(in the same sense as a knife can sting me). Neal Schermerhorn has suggested (in
{HolQeD} 2:3 p.14) that the sentence {lu'aw'lu' mInDu'wIj.} might be a better
translation. Apart from the order of the words I agree. It is the object of the
*verb prefix* that becomes the subject of the sentence when {-lu'} <indefinite
subject> is used. The word order remains the same, as is clearly demonstrated in
the example {naDev puqpu' tu'lu'.} <There are children here.> in TKD p.39. Both
{mInDu'wIj lu'aw'lu'.} <My eyes sting.> or <Someone/something stings my eyes.>
and the simpler {'oy' mInDu'wIj.} <My eyes ache.> (also seen in KGT p.20) good
ways to express the same thing.]]

<What is this place?>
   {Daqvam nuq.}

<That is classified information.>
   {pegh De'vetlh.}
   [[Lit. <That information is secret.>]]

<When can I return to my room?>
   {ghorgh pa'wIjDaq jIchegh.}

A travel tip. Klingons will generally allow you to make holographic facsimiles
of people, but some of the places you will come across are considered sacred, or
restricted, and should not be replicated. A misjudgment on you part could lead
to unfortunate consequences, including incarceration, which could ruin your
vacation. Do not guess, always ask.

As you tour around, you may want to express reactions to what you see, so here
are some useful words. Be careful though, your values probably do not match
those of most Klingons and this extends to taste. You may not appreciate, for
example, why Klingons find the pain endured during a fight so pleasing, or why
they consider the harmony of most Terran music so objectionable. To avoid
confrontation you might not want to express your opinions to just anybody. Now
repeat each word, after you hear it the second time. {yIqIm.}

<Beautiful>
   {'IH}
   {'IH}
   {...}

<Ugly>
   {moH}
   {moH}
   {...}

<Odd>
   {jum}
   {jum}
   {...}

<Powerful>
   {HoSghaj}
   {HoSghaj}
   {...}

<Superior>
   {nIv}
   {nIv}
   {...}

<Inferior>
   {QIv}
   {QIv}
   {...}

<Messy>
   {ghIH}
   {ghIH}
   {...}

After a busy day of sightseeing, you will probably be hungry. As it turns out
one of the more unforgettable parts of a visit to a Klingon planet, is sampling
the local cuisine. There are many restaurants to serve you. Most Terrans find
traditional Klingon food a little unusual, but after a while they seem to get
used to it, and compared with what they serve in the small ethnic cafes, it is
downright bland. Klingon restaurant workers, cooks, servers, everyone, are very
helpful to non-Klingons. They are proud of their cuisine and really enjoy
talking about it. This is one case where you will not have to worry about asking
to many questions. In this next dialogue, a Terran tourist is getting ready to
order Klingon food for the first time. {yIqIm.}

<Do you understand the menu, Terran?>
   {HIDjolev Dayaj'a', tera'ngan.}

<No. Help me.>
   {ghobe'. HIboQ.}

<Do you trust me?>
   {chovoq'a'.}

<Yes. I trust you.>
   {HIja'. qavoq.}

<I'll bring you dinner number three.>
   {SoHvaD 'uQ wej vIqem.}

<I'll bring tea, also.>
   {Dargh vIqem je.}

<Okay.>
   {lu'.}

<Pay now!>
   {DaH yIDIl.}

<Bon appétit, Terran.>
   {peSop, tera'ngan.} [[peSop:=yISop]]

[[Transcriber's note: Sic! Another of Marc Okrand's small mistakes. {pe-} is an
imperative prefix used only when there is a *plural subject* and since the
Terran seems to be dining alone here this isn't the case. The waiter should have
said {yISop, tera'ngan.} <Eat, Terran!>]]

<How do I eat the food?>
   {chay' Soj vISop.}

<Use your hands.>
   {ghopDu'lIj yIlo'.}

<What is this?>
   {Dochvam nuq.}

<You are eating serpent worms.>
   {qagh DaSop.}

<The serpent worms are moving.>
   {vIH qagh.}

<Eat them quickly.>
   {nom yISop.}

<There's food all over my face.>
   {qabwIjDaq Soj tu'lu'bej.}

<Then you're obviously enjoying it.>
   {vaj DatIvba'.}

<Eat the pipius claw.>
   {pIpyuS pach vISop.} [[vISop:=yISop]]

<Is Klingon food always raw?>
   {reH tlhol'a' tlhIngan Soj.}

<Terrans enjoy eating burnt animals.>
   {Ha'DIbaHmey meQ Sop 'e' tIv tera'nganpu'.}

<Klingons never destroy good food.>
   {not Soj QaQ Qaw' tlhInganpu'.}

Now that you have eaten it is time for some fun. Klingons put as much energy
into their recreational activities as they do into matters of warfare. And one
of the most popular places to unwind is the local bar. Klingon bars are not just
places for drinking, while there you can also enjoy a show, listen to music,
participate in sports, or make useful business contacts. A visit to a Klingon
bar is an unforgettable experience, and you should definitely do it. But, at
least the first time, do not go in alone. Regular bar patrons tend to be a
little suspicious of new faces. The desk clerk where you are staying should be
able to locate someone who would be willing to accompany you and introduce you
as his or her guest, or if you can read Klingon, go to any communications
terminal and consult the data banks yourself. Use the category <alien escort>,
or {nov DorwI'}. In this next dialogue the Terran visitor begins by making
appropriate arrangements with a Klingon she has just met:

<Will you escort me to a bar?>
   {tachDaq choDor'a'.}

<Yes. Come with me.>
   {HIja'. HItlhej.}

<Okay. Let's go!>
   {lu'. Ha'.}

<Why is there rubble everywhere, Klingon?>
   {qatlh Dat DI tu'lu', tlhIngan.}

<Bars resemble warrior's homes.>
   {SuvwI' juHmey rur tachmey.}

<Will you drink, Terran?>
   {bItlhutlh'a', tera'ngan?}

<Yes. What is there?>
   {HIja'. nuq tu'lu'.}

<They serve black ale, or Regulan bloodwine.>
   {HIq qIj reghuluS 'Iw HIq ghap jab.}

[[Transcriber's note: The spelling of bloodwine {'Iw HIq} with two separate
words instead of just one (as I would have guessed) {'IwHIq} was taken from KGT
(page 94). Literally this would mean <blood's wine> or <wine of blood> -- which,
of course, could be considered proper since blood is added "for flavor and
strength".]]

<They won't serve Romulan ale to Terrans, to potent.>
   {tera'nganvaD romuluS HIq jabQo'. HoSghajqu'.}

<I'll have the black ale.>
   {HIq qIj vItlhutlh vIneH.}

The Klingon is about to propose a toast, do not take it any more literally then
you would if he were to say "Here is mud in your eye!"

<May your blood scream.>
   {'IwlIj jachjaj.}

[[Transcriber's note: This is a much discussed feature of Klingon grammar,
logically this toast should be "jachjaj 'IwlIj" since the subject normally come
after the verb in a sentence. In Power Klingon, however, we learn that this is
not always the case, toasts involving {-jaj} being the exception. In KGT (p.25)
we get an even better explanation as to what is going on, as we learn that any
verb taking the suffix {-jaj} must come last in the sentence if is used as a
toast -- even if this means that the subject is placed before the verb. Prior to
this explanation this sentence was noted as erroneous by Neal Schermerhorn in
{HolQeD} 2:3 p.14.]]

<What's happening over there?>
   {pa'Daq qaStaH nuq.} [[pa'Daq:=pa']]

[[Transcriber's note: This really means <What is happening in the room?>
according to TKD, p.27-28, "Unlike other nouns, these three words [{naDev},
{pa'} and {Dat}] are never followed by the locative suffix. (Note that {pa'}
<thereabouts> and {pa'} <room> is identical in sound; {pa'Daq}, however, can
mean only <in/to the room.>)"]]

<Klingon warriors are butting heads.>
   {qIp'egh nachDu'chaj, tlhIngan SuvwI'pu'.}

[[Transcriber's note: This seems like a very bizarre sentence to me. <Their
heads are hitting themselves, Klingon warriors.>]]

<Everyone enjoys a mock battle.>
   {may' ngeb tIv Hoch.}

<If we get lucky, one will get angry.>
   {maDo'chugh QeHchoH wa'.}

[In background:] {'eb Qav. 'eb Qav.}
   [[<Last opportunity.>]]

<What did he say?>
   {nuqjatlh.}

<He said: "Last call.">
   {"'eb Qav" jatlhpu'.}

<Will you drink another one?>
   {latlh Datlhutlh'a'.}

<No. I feel sick.>
   {ghobe'. jIroplaw'.}

<Then you need to drink sour tea.>
   {vaj Dargh wIb DatlhutlhnIS.}

<Sour tea cures everything.>
   {Hoch vor Dargh wIb.}

A word of advice. Klingon drinks are a great deal more potent than most Terran
concoctions. Sour tea is an effective remedy if any thing you eat or drink does
not sit right, but you may find it difficult to swallow. If you have a favorite
remedy, just bring it along.

We have almost reached the end of this introduction to conversational Klingon,
but it would be inappropriate to conclude without giving you some words you
might need in an emergency. You may have to be a little persistent to get a
Klingon to come to your aid. This is not because they are ignoring you, or
savoring your discomfort, it is just that what Terrans consider dangerous and
unpleasant a Klingon usually finds exhilarating and enjoyable. So, if no-one
comes to your aid at first, shout out the phrase:

<I am not a Klingon.>
   {tlhIngan jIHbe'.}

This will make your plight explicit and a Klingon is sure to respond. Now, for
the last time as we say these phrases, repeat each one after you hear it the
second time. {yIqIm.}

<Danger>
   {Qob}
   {Qob}
   {...}

<Help>
   {QaH}
   {QaH}
   {...}

<Get help quickly!>
   {nom QaH yIqem.}
   {nom QaH yIqem.}
   {...}

<Don't touch me!>
   {HIHotQo'.}
   {HIHotQo'.}
   {...}

<Beam me up!>
   {HIjol.}
   {HIjol.}
   {...}

<I didn't do it.>
   {vIta'pu'be'.}
   {vIta'pu'be'.}
   {...}

<No problem.>
   {qay'be'.}
   {qay'be'.}
   {...}

<I need to find a doctor.>
   {Qel vISamnIS.}
   {Qel vISamnIS.}
   {...}

Finally, a phrase that for some reason seems to get a Klingon's attention
relatively quickly.

<Where do you keep the chocolate?>
   {nuqDaq yuch Dapol.}
   {nuqDaq yuch Dapol.}
   {...}

We have now reached the end of this instructional session. Turn the tape over,
and start listening again, from the beginning. To learn the language it is
important to practice regularly and with full concentration. It is not easy, but
if you keep working at it, you will soon be adequately prepared to enter into a
dialogue with any Klingon you are fortunate enough to encounter.

<It has been an honor to instruct you. Success.>
   {batlh qaghojmoHpu'. Qapla'.}

"Conversational Klingon" was adopted for audio by Marc Okrand. It was read by
Michael Dorn with Marc Okrand. Additional performances by Dina Corsetti(?), and
Sam Gunsler(?). The recording engineer was Leszek Wójcik and Rick Dasher(?) from
Mark Raow(?) Recording Services. The tape editor was Dave LeVan(?). Post
production and sound designed by Gary Fink(?). The associate producers were
Linda Wollman and Jan Warner(?). Michael Dorn was directed by Bob Walter(?).
Conversational Klingon was produced and directed by Susan Perrin.

Also available from Simon and Schuster Audioworks: "Star Trek the Next
Generation: Imzadi" by Peter David, read by Jonathan Frakes.

[[eof]]
