[[
  [1997-10-03] transcribed most of side 1
  [1998-01-18] intro dialogue added
  [1998-02-16] finished transcription of side 1
  [1998-05-13] transcribed 1/4 of side 2
  [1998-09-25] finished transcription, some spell checking
  [1998-09-30] arranged layout and added special characters
  [1999-10-01] compared with tape, corrected found errors; checked that () []
               {} »« were all paired properly
  [1998-10-02] machine-parsed for capitalization errors
  [1998-10-05] machine-parsed for incorrect syllables (errors: 1)
  [1999-02-13] added timed length
  [1999-02-14] compared with tape, correcting errors
  [2000-03-27] corrected {chapujqut} to {cha'pujqut}
  [2000-08-02] Americanized spelling of "behavior", "ardor", "humor"
  [2001-08-17] changed {Dachoqbe'} in intro to the more likely {Daqotlhbe'};
               changed {'Iw ghargh} to {'Iwghargh}. [Thanks Lieven!]
  [2003-01-30] cleaned up text some
  [2006-07-25] added additional ISBNs to "Publisher" field, added day to
               release date (info from Amazon)
  [2011-09-19] incorporated *many* suggestions sent to me by Stevo (in
               2004-03-14), e.g. speaker indication, spelling corrections;
               added missing timing information for [[# mark: ... #]]s at the
               end of the file
  [2016-09-10] many English spelling corrections (using `aspell`)
  [2016-09-11] re-wrapped text to 80 width of 80 columns
  [2020-07-26] minor correction {vItuHpa'} -> {bItuHpa'}
  Style: {}=bold, <>=italics

  Type: audio cassette / CD
  Date: (1 October) 1993
  Title: <Power Klingon>
  Author: Marc Okrand and Barry Levine, presented by Michael Dorn
  Publisher: Audioworks, Simon & Schuster, London, ISBN 0-671-85319-8
    (alternate ISBN 0-671-87975-8; CD released October 1996, ISBN
    0-671-85667-7)
  Summary: This audio cassette is number two in the series (beginning with
    <Conversational Klingon>) and it is intended for the serious traveler,
    student or businessman and people that will spend a lot of time in the
    Empire. The audio cassette version comes with an inlay folder, which is
    missing from the CD version. (Usually abbreviated <PK>.)

  : Side one:
  :   Business deal (untranslated dialogue)
  :   Foreword
  :   The four ideals of behavior
  :      Accuracy (noun suffixes)
  :      Accuracy (verb suffixes)
  :      Straightforwardness
  :      Aggressiveness and strength
  :      Business deal (dialogue)
  :      [1st break]
  :      Ordering drinks
  :      Toasting
  :      Cursing
  :      [2nd break]
  :      Addressing a superior
  :      Use of the Standard Dialect
  : Side two:
  :      [3rd break]
  :      Replacement Proverbs
  :      Secrecy Proverbs
  :      Holiday Proverbs ({QI'lop})
  :      Empire Union Day
  :      Rite of Ascension
  :      [4th break]
  :      Mating Ritual
  :      Clipped Klingon
  :      [5th break]
  :      Telling jokes
  :      Addressing Pets
  :   Example Dialogues
  :      A business deal (dialogue)
  :      Toasting (dialogue)
  :      Cursed warfare (dialogue)
  :      Empire Union Day (dialogue)
  :      Confronting a pet (dialogue)
  :      Secrecy proverbs (dialogue)
  :      Replacement proverbs (dialogue)
  :      A mating ritual overture (dialogue)
  :      Telling a joke (dialogue)
  :   Afterword

]]


  ****************************************************************************
****                                                                        ****
***                               POWER KLINGON                              ***
***                      By Barry Levine and Marc Okrand                     ***
***                                                                          ***
***                                                                          ***
***                   Recording, (c)1993 Paramount Pictures                  ***
***                        1:12:01 Hours Playing Time                        ***
***                                                                          ***
***                            ISBN 0-671-85319-8                            ***
***                        Simon & Schuster Audioworks                       ***
***                                 New York                                 ***
***                                                                          ***
***                                                                          ***
***                      Transcription, ©1997-2016 zrajm                     ***
***                          (For private use only.)                         ***
****                                                                        ****
  ****************************************************************************

I have attempted to proofread this text as thoroughly as possible, using both a
spell checking program and going over the text several times while listening to
the tape. However I am aiming to constantly improve the quality of this
transcription, and any comments, suggestions or questions are most welcome.

The following characters have special meaning in this transcript:

   {...} Indicates a void you are supposed to fill with a Klingon phrase. (only
         used it the CK and PK transcriptions).
   *     surrounds any *emphasized* word (normally written in italics, also used
         for words that are transliterated rather than translated, such as
         *bat'leth* or *d'k tagh*).
   #     surrounds any #non-standard# or #incorrect# Klingon (used mostly for
         dialects or examples illustrating non-standard phonology or incorrect
         grammar).
   <>    signifies a phrase in English, that also is presented in Klingon.
   ""    are used for quotation marks. Usually there is a describing quote from
         the main text, when no direct translation is available in that source.
   {}    surrounds all Klingon words and phrases (normally written in boldface).
   [[.]] surrounds my own thoughts or opinions, or a general comment about
         something in the source (disturbing sound effect on the tapes,
         grammatical error, weird translation, whatever). Most often this
         comment is a simple source reference however.
   (?)   comes after words with uncertain spelling, or otherwise doubtful
         entries (mostly names spoken on the tapes, whose spelling I have been
         unable to confirm).

Special thanks for contributions go to:
  * Lieven L. Litaer, Germany
  * Steven Lytle, Mexico

/zrajm

Narrators:

    HF -- Human female
    HM -- Human male
    KF -- Klingon female
    KM -- Klingon male
    MD -- Michael Dorn
    MO -- Marc Okrand

[[Copied from the inlay folder:]]


   ========================
    KLINGON POWER PHRASES:
   ========================


SHOWING AGGRESSIVENESS AND STRENGTH

<No problem.>
   {qay'be'.}

<Shut up!>
   {bIjatlh 'e' yImev!}

<If you shine my nose, I will give you your nose.>
   {ghIchwIj DabochmoHchugh, ghIchlIj qanob.}


CURSE WARFARE (MU'QAD VES)

<Your face looks like a collapsed star!>
   {Dejpu'bogh Hov rur qablIj!}

<You are a total waste of good energy!>
   {HoS lI' Dalo'Ha'chu'!}

<You belong in a black hole in the netherworld!>
   {ghe' 'orDaq luSpet 'oH DaqlIj'e'!} [[ghe' 'orDaq:=ghe''orDaq]]

<Your mother has a smooth forehead!>
   {Hab SoSlI' Quch!}


TOASTING

<May your blood scream.>
   {'IwlIj jachjaj.}

<May you always find a bloodworm in your glass.>
   {reH HIvje'lIjDaq 'Iwghargh Datu'jaj.}

<May you coordinates be free of tribbles.>
   {QuvlIjDaq yIH tu'be'lu'jaj.}

<May you endure the pain.>
   {'oy' DaSIQjaj.}


PET COMMANDS

<Sit!>
   {ba'!}

<Attack!>
   {HIv!}

<Do not eat that!>
   {mev!}

<Stand!>
   {Qam!}

<Chew that arm!>
   {DeSveth yIv!} [[DeSveth:=DeSvetlh]]

<Bad animal!>
   {Ha'DIbaH qab!}


REPLACEMENT PROVERBS

<Set fire on the side when there is danger.>
   {DopDaq qul yIchenmoH QobDI' ghu'.}

<A great warrior is always prepared.>
   {reH Suvrup SuvwI''a'.}

<Only fools laugh while warriors die.>
   {Hagh qoHpu' neH HeghtaHvIS SuvwI'pu'.}

<The Fek'lhr strikes again.>
   {HIvqa' veqlargh.}


RITE OF ASCENSION (NENTAY)

<Today you are a warrior.>
   {DaHjaj SuvwI' SoH.}

<May you travel the river of blood.>
   {'Iw bIQtIqDaq bIlengjaj.}

<You must show your heart.>
   {tIqlIj Da'angnIS.}


SECRECY PROVERBS

<A day without secrets is like a night without stars.>
   {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}

<Knowledge of useful information may be unfortunate.>
   {De' lI' Sovlu'DI' chaq Do'Ha'.}

<Secrets never cease.>
   {not mev peghmey.}

<The stars will talk before I will.>
   {jIjatlhpa' jatlh Hovmey.}


HOLIDAY PROVERBS

<Eat everything or you will die without honor.>
   {Hoch DaSopbe'chugh batlh bIHeghbe'.}

<I will remember this dinner forever.>
   {reH 'uQvam vIqawtaH.}

<May you encounter Kahless in your dreams.>
   {bInajtaHvIS qeylIS Daghomjaj.}

<Death before shame.>
   {bItuHpa' bIHeghjaj.}


   ==========================================
    SIDE ONE: [[34:15 Minutes Playing Time]]
   ==========================================

[[# Mark: [0:00] Business deal (untranslated dialogue) #]]

HM: <Power Klingon> by Barry Levine, with Marc Okrand.

KM: {nuqneH?}
   [[<What do you want?>]]

HM: {'IH jaj, qar'a'? maja'chuqjaj.}
   [[<Beautiful day, isn't it? May we talk?>]]

KM: {jISaHbe'.}
   [[<I don't care.>]]

HM: {bISaHbe'. qatlh bIjatlh?}
   {chaq SoHvo' vay' vIje' vIneH.}
   [[<You don't care. Why do you say that?>]]
   [[<Maybe I'd like to buy something from you.>]]

KM: {tugh. #SSS.# bIje'be'chugh vaj bIHegh.}
   {quvwIj DatIchpu', tera'ngan.}
   {bIyIntaH 'e' Daqotlhbe'.}
   [[<Hurry up! Buy or die.>]]
   [[<You have insulted my honor, Terran.>]]
   [[<You do not deserve to live.>]]

[[disruptor fire]]

HM: {yIjotchoH.}
   [[<Calm down!>]]

[[more disruptor fire]]

HM: {Dochvetlh yItlhap.}
   [[<Take that!>]]

[[phaser fire]]

[[disruptor fire]]

[[scream]]

[[# Mark: [0:54] Foreword #]]

MD: The scene you have just heard was a disaster of misunderstanding. Both the
Klingon and the Terran misinterpreted each other's words. The Terran entered the
Klingon's shop to buy some dilithium crystals, but made mistake after mistake in
addressing the Klingon trader. The Klingon thought his honor was being
challenged, and his customary suspicions about Terrans were alerted. He
responded angrily. The Terran, although he spoke Klingon, misunderstood the
power of language. He thought the Klingon threatened him. The mutual
misunderstandings had lethal results. Unfortunately, ever since Terrans
established relationships within the Klingon Empire, such incidents have been
common.

MD: This tape addresses the problem. In the previous tape in this series,
<Conversational Klingon>, we studied the words, grammar, and simple phrases that
a tourist on a short-term stay might require in the Empire. In <Power Klingon>
we will concentrate on the phrases and situations that will be encountered by
the serious Klingon traveler, whether a business person, a student in residence,
a diplomat, or anyone on a mission that requires long-term interaction with
Klingon society. To succeed in those situations you will need to know more than
how to order a meal; you will need to think like a Klingon. We will concentrate
on the use of key words and phrases that can mean the difference between: profit
and loss, respect and dishonor, mating and rejection, life and death. As we have
just heard, inhabitants of the Klingon planets do not tolerate mistakes
gracefully. This is *not* Italian.

MD: The history of the Empire is filled with conflicts fought over misunderstood
language, such as the bloody so-called "War of Insults", which lasted nearly
eight generations. The first step to understanding Klingon is to grasp your own
power. You need to feel the language becoming an extension of your physical
self, much as a knife is. Practice the lessons on this tape in front of a
mirror, full length if possible. Begin by clearing your mind of all doubts,
stand tall, and feel the muscles working as they generate each word. Deliver
your words with as much power as you can muster. Project your thoughts as
powerfully as your words. Klingon is a language of controlled fury. It is also a
language that virtually requires spitting, so be sure to stand back a bit from
the mirror. As you exercise these hidden strengths you will feel your physical
and spiritual muscles hardening and your instincts becoming that of a language
warrior. You will begin to find the Klingon hidden within you.

[[# Mark: [04:05] The four ideals of behavior #]]

MD: Let us start by demonstrating how acceptable Klingon conduct, derived from
generations of battle behavior, can be conveyed through language. Above all
else, Klingon warriors value four main ideals of behavior: accuracy,
straightforwardness, aggressiveness, and strength. By careful use of language
you can immediately signal your respect for these ideals, thus gaining respect.
If you are going to operate in Klingon society you must have respect.

MO: One way to indicate your dedication to accuracy, the first ideal of
behavior, is to use qualifying suffixes. These are short syllables, attached to
either nouns or verbs, to indicate the degree of accuracy. There are three
suffixes for nouns, and three others for verbs.

[[# Mark: [05:04] Accuracy (noun suffixes) #]]

For nouns the qualifying suffixes indicate whether the noun is <so-called>,
<apparent>, or <definite>. For these suffixes, and throughout this tape, repeat
each Klingon word or phrase after you've heard it twice.

The noun suffix for <so-called> is {-qoq}. It indicates that the word is being
used ironically or inappropriately:
   {-qoq}
   {-qoq}
   {...}

Be sure you pronounce the sound at the beginning and end of this suffix as far
back in your mouth as you can. Again:
   {-qoq}
   {-qoq}
   {...}

For instance, the word for peace is {roj}. If you believe the peace is actually
nonexistent, you could indicate that it is the <so-called peace> by adding the
suffix {-qoq}:
   {rojqoq}
   {rojqoq}
   {...}

The noun suffix for <apparent> is {-Hey}:
   {-Hey}
   {-Hey}
   {...}

As an example, the word for <strength> is {HoS}. So if you wanted to indicate
someone's apparent, although not yet proven strength, you could say:
   {HoSHey}
   {HoSHey}
   {...}

And the noun suffix for <definite> is {-na'}. It's used when there's no doubt in
your mind about the accuracy of the statement.
   {-na'}
   {-na'}
   {...}

Notice how the sound stops abruptly at the end of this suffix. It's {-na'}, not
{#-na#}. For instance, the word for leader is {DevwI'}, but a true leader, a
definitely unquestioned leader is:
   {DevwI'na'}
   {DevwI'na'}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [07:08] Accuracy (verb suffixes) #]]

Similarly, the three qualifying suffixes for verbs also signify respect for
accuracy. The verb suffix for <clearly> or <perfectly> is:
   {-chu'}
   {-chu'}
   {...}

The sound stops abruptly at the end of this suffix also. Listen carefully:
   {-chu'}
   {-chu'}
   {...}

The use of this verb suffix indicates that an action in performed absolutely
properly.

<He aims the photon torpedo.>
   {'otlh peng Qeq.}
   {'otlh peng Qeq.}
   {...}

<He aims the photon torpedo perfectly.>
   {'otlh peng Qeqchu'.}
   {'otlh peng Qeqchu'.}
   {...}

The suffix {-bej} means <certainly> or <undoubtedly> or <definitely>:
   {-bej}
   {-bej}
   {...}

For instance {Dal} means <It is boring>. To get the first sound in that word
right, make sure your tongue is pointed straight up towards the roof of your
mouth.

If you wanted to say <It's undoubtedly boring.> you would say:
   {Dalbej.}
   {Dalbej.}
   {...}

And the verb suffix for <seemingly> or <apparently> is:
   {-law'}
   {-law'}
   {...}

<That ship is tracking us.>
   {nughoch Dujvetlh.}
   {nughoch Dujvetlh.}
   {...}

<That ship is apparently tracking us.>
   {nughochlaw' Dujvetlh.}
   {nughochlaw' Dujvetlh.}
   {...}

This last suffix could also mean <I suspect> or <I think> such as <I suspect
that ship is tracking us.>

MD: The injection of just a few of these qualifying suffixes, either noun or
verb, demonstrates that the Terran places a high value on accuracy, and
therefore on a key part of the ideals of behavior. Now, let us see how the
prominent display of these other three ideals of proper behavior can also
enhance your power position, especially in the world of business. Again, these
other three ideals are: straightforwardness, aggressiveness, and strength. Since
harmonious relations between the Klingon Empire and the Federation have
increased, the Empire has experienced a boom in three industries: tourism,
dilithium crystal mining, and arms trading. Although a market economy, the
Klingon system operates under nearly full-time war conditions. Extreme
suspicion, especially of foreigners, is considered prudent behavior.

[[# Mark: [10:33] Straightforwardness #]]

Klingons do not bargain or haggle, and every deal, whether you are buyer or
seller, is a take-it-or-leave-it proposition. Every business deal, especially
with a foreigner, is considered a kind of ritual battle. So your reference to
the ideals of behavior is important, since it indicates you are a worthy
opponent for this ritual. In practice many deals in the Empire are increasingly
conducted in Federation Standard, which is fast becoming the intergalactic
language of commerce. Even so, it would be useful in this ritual to reach into
your quiver of combat Klingon phrases now and again. This indicates your
attentiveness to accepted ideals of behavior. As we have indicated, the use of
noun and verb suffixes to indicate the first ideal, accuracy, can help minimize
those suspicions. Applying the second ideal of behavior, straightforwardness,
can also be helpful. There is a simple, although sometimes overlooked way to
indicate straightforwardness, always begin talking immediately about the matter
at hand. Greetings, pleasantries, and small talk are considered signs of
duplicity. Remember how the unfortunate Terran, heard at the beginning of this
tape, initiated his deal discussion.

KM: <What do you want?>
MO: {nuqneH?}

HM: <Beautiful day, isn't it? Can we talk?>
MO: {'IH jaj, qar'a'? maja'chuqjaj.}

KM: <I do not care.>
MO: {jISaHbe'.}

MD: The Terran began on the wrong foot, by indicating something much less than
straightforwardness. He undoubtedly will not do that again. Let us see how
attention to straightforwardness would have fared better:

KM: <What do you want?>
MO: {nuqneH?}

HM: <I want to buy dilithium crystals.>
MO: {cha'pujqutmey vIje' vIneH.}

KM: <Come with me!>
MO: {HItlhej.}

[[# Mark: [13:21] Aggressiveness and strength #]]

MD: Now let us move on to the last two ideals, namely: aggressiveness and
strength. Here are a few phrases which indicate these ideals. Use them
frequently in whatever circumstances that may be appropriate:

HF: <No problem.>
MO: {qay'be'.}
   {qay'be'.}
   {...}

HF: <Hurry up!>
MO: {tugh.}
   {tugh.}
   {...}

HF: <Shut up!>
MO: {bIjatlh 'e' yImev.}
   {bIjatlh 'e' yImev.}
   {...}

MO: If you're the buyer you can say:

HF: <Sell it to me now!>
MO: {DaH jIHvaD yIngev.}
   {DaH jIHvaD yIngev.}
   {...}

That sound in the middle of the last word is the same as the sound at the end of
the Federation Standard "sing". Be sure to say {ngev}, not {#nev#} or {#nyev#}.

Or, if you're the seller you can say:

HF: <Pay or die.>
MO: {bIDIlbe'chugh, vaj bIHegh.}
   {bIDIlbe'chugh, vaj bIHegh.}
   {...}

MD: These next two phrases, which also indicate aggressiveness and strength, may
sound like invitations to begin fighting. In fact, they are common idioms whose
origins are lost to antiquity.

The first one often has the same effect as saying "Do not try to mislead me if
you value your life", but literally translated it means:

HF: <If you shine my nose, I will give you *your* nose.>
MO: {ghIchwIj DabochmoHchugh, ghIchlIj qanob.}
   {ghIchwIj DabochmoHchugh, ghIchlIj qanob.}
   {...}

The other idiomatic phrase generally means "I am much stronger than you."
Literally translated it means:

HF: <My blood is thicker than yours.>
MO: {'IwwIj jeD law' 'IwlIj jeD puS.}
   {'IwwIj jeD law' 'IwlIj jeD puS.}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [15:51] Business deal (dialogue) #]]

MD: Now let us put this all together and see how our Terran could have used some
of these suffixes and phrases, as well as a straightforward approach, to bolster
his position. Note how the Klingon trader's attitude changes as he realizes that
the Terran is exhibiting all the expected ideals of accuracy,
straightforwardness, aggressiveness, and strength.

KM: <What do you want?>
MO: {nuqneH?}

HM: <I definitely want to buy dilithium crystals.>
MO: {cha'pujqutmey vIje' vIneHbej.}

KM: <I understand. Come with me!>
MO: {jIyaj. HItlhej.}

HM: <Here they are. Two thousand credits. Hurry up!>
MO: {naDev bIHtaH. cha'SaD DeQ. tugh.}

KM: <Pay or die.>
MO: {bIDIlbe'chugh, vaj bIHegh.}

HM: <Shut up! I definitely want them.>
MO: {bIjatlh 'e' yImev. vIneHbej.}

HM: <If you shine my nose, I will give you *your* nose.>
MO: {ghIchwIj DabochmoHchugh, ghIchlIj qanob.}

HM: <Take the credits!>
MO: {DeQ tItlhap.}

KM: <You transact business honorably.>
MO: {batlh malja' DaHuq.}

MD: Now, take a brief break. <Relax!>
MO: {yIleS.}

[[# Mark: [17:40] Ordering drinks #]]

MD: <Stop relaxing!>
MO: {bIleS 'e' yImev.}

MD: We have seen how the careful use of a few suffixes, words, and phrases can
increase your position in a business deal. A successful deal with a Klingon
trader will frequently be sealed by a toast, usually at a nearby bar. The person
who initiated the deal makes the first toast. In this situation, as well, there
are a few important ways to use the Klingon language as a means of increasing
your power and acceptance. Your first consideration is what drink to order.
Terran tourists never drink Romulan ale, because of its potency, but the savvy
business person who wants to develop and impress Klingon clientele will have
made the utmost effort to develop a tolerance for the brew. If you do so, and
are able to utter the following phrase to the waiter, you will see your standing
literally jump in the eyes of your business acquaintance.

HF: <Waiter.>
MO: {jabwI'.}
   {jabwI'.}
   {...}

HF: <I will drink Romulan ale.>
MO: {romuluS HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {romuluS HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {...}

HF: <Fill a large glass!>
MO: {HIvje' tIn yIteb.}
   {HIvje' tIn yIteb.}
   {...}

HF: <Do not bring ice!>
MO: {chuch yIqemQo'.}
   {chuch yIqemQo'.}
   {...}

MD: If you simply cannot tolerate, or have not yet tried Romulan ale, do *not*
order it. Here are two phrases for other drinks, which, while not having the
impact of Romulan ale, are still impressive. Skip the Regulan bloodwine and
black ale, which are known as tourist drinks. And, as in most foreign
establishments, ordering in the native language still counts for something.

HF: <I will drink boiling worm wine.>
MO: {pubtaHbogh ghargh HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {pubtaHbogh ghargh HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {...}

MD: Or you could say:

HF: <I will drink two century old ale.>
MO: {cha'vatlh ben HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {cha'vatlh ben HIq vItlhutlh.}
   {...}

MO: Be sure you say the word for <drink> correctly, it is {tlhutlh}. If you
mispronounce it, who knows what you'll be saying you plan to do with the wine or
the ale? The word begins and ends with the same sound, sort of a combination "t"
and whispered "l".
MO: {tlhutlh}
   {tlhutlh}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [20:39] Toasting #]]

MD: When the drinks arrive it is important to use only the handful of accepted
toasts. You cannot simply say "To your health!" even if it were in Klingon,
because it would be considered too bland. The following are some acceptable
toasts. It does not matter which ones are used by the deal initiator and which
by the deal acceptor, but it does matter that you recite them in Klingon with
force and gusto. You must also be careful to get the toast absolutely correct.
Klingons take their toasts very seriously, and many toasts follow special
grammatical rules. A recent Federation inquiry into a fatality at a bar on
Kronos indicated that the offending Terran simply reversed the order of two
words in a toast, thereby offending all the previous and several succeeding
generations of the toastee. As of the release of this tape they were still
finding his pieces.

So, repeat these toasts exactly:

KM: <May your blood scream.>
MO: {'IwlIj jachjaj.}
   {'IwlIj jachjaj.}
   {...}

KM: <May you always find a bloodworm in your glass.>
MO: {reH HIvje'lIjDaq 'Iwghargh Datu'jaj.}
   {reH HIvje'lIjDaq 'Iwghargh Datu'jaj.}
   {...}

KM: <May your coordinates be free of tribbles.>
MO: {QuvlIjDaq yIH tu'be'lu'jaj.}
   {QuvlIjDaq yIH tu'be'lu'jaj.}
   {...}

KM: <May you die in battle.>
MO: {bISuvtaHvIS bIHeghjaj.}
   {bISuvtaHvIS bIHeghjaj.}
   {...}

KM: <May you endure the pain.>
MO: {'oy' DaSIQjaj.}
   {'oy' DaSIQjaj.}
   {...}

KM: <Klingons forever!>
MO: {reH tlhInganpu' taHjaj.}
   {reH tlhInganpu' taHjaj.}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [23:14] Cursing #]]

MD: After the toasts, your deal partner will probably participate in what is
known as a {mu'qaD veS}. This can be translated as <curse warfare>. It is a
ritualized contest of cursing that the renowned galactic ethnologist, Dr.
Frederick Ramnanberg(?) of the Federation Institute for Bio-Diverse Studies, has
compared to the ancient game of football that some Federation planets still
enjoy. {mu'qaD veS}, like football, is a highly stylized warfare substitute,
characterized by violent gestures, agility, a high degree of competition, and
betting. But while football is clearly divided into participants and spectators,
everyone within earshot of a curse warfare match is a potential, or actual,
participant and only becomes a spectator when beaten. If you are a tourist in a
bar when curse warfare begins, no one will expect you to participate, but if you
are a long-term visitor and, especially if you have just concluded a deal, you
can certainly enhance your status by getting in a few good curses. This is one
area where practice in front of a mirror will come in handy, since performance
is nearly as important as the words themselves.

MO: Here are a few of the most common curses. Repeat each one with as much power
and style as you can project.

HM: <Go mate with your targ!>
MO: {targhlIj yIngagh! yIruch!}
   {targhlIj yIngagh! yIruch!}
   {...}

HM: <Your face looks like a collapsed star.>
MO: {Dejpu'bogh Hov rur qablIj.}
   {Dejpu'bogh Hov rur qablIj.}
   {...}

HM: <Your targ has a bigger brain than all your ancestors put together.>
MO: {targhlIj yab tIn law' no'lI' Hoch yabDu' tIn puS.}
   {targhlIj yab tIn law' no'lI' Hoch yabDu' tIn puS.}
   {...}

HM: <You belong in a black hole in the netherworld.>
MO: {ghe''orDaq luSpet 'oH DaqlIj'e'.}
   {ghe''orDaq luSpet 'oH DaqlIj'e'.}
   {...}

HM: <You are a total waste of good energy.>
MO: {HoS lI' Dalo'Ha'chu'.}
   {HoS lI' Dalo'Ha'chu'.}
   {...}

And the most insulting curse of all:

HM: <Your mother has a smooth forehead.>
MO: {Hab SoSlI' Quch.}
   {Hab SoSlI' Quch.}
   {...}

MO: Be sure to pronounce the word for forehead correctly; it is {Quch}. The
sound at the beginning is a noisy one, made as far back in your throat as you
can go: {Q}, {Q}. If you don't say it right you may end up saying {Huch} instead
of {Quch}, and then you'd be talking about <money> instead of a <forehead>.

MD: If you ever do engage in a bout of Klingon curse warfare, just remember that
it is not personal and should be kept on a purely verbal basis, unless, of
course, you actually like physical contact and are good at it, which is beyond
the scope of this tape.

MD: Now <We will take a quick break.>
MO: {loQ mayev.}

[[# Mark: [27:05] Addressing a superior #]]

MD: <Stop breaking!>
MO: {bIyev 'e' yImev.}

MD: Curse warfare is one arena of Klingon life where everyone begins as an
equal, but in everyday life Klingon society is divided by a class system. The
Empire's class system is primarily a military one, with the top echelons
occupied by the Emperor and his retinue. One way for a foreigner to assert power
is to recognize it and ally oneself with it, and in the Empire respect comes to
those who assert power. You will usually know who is most powerful by the
Klingon military markings. Virtually everyone wears them. You can become
familiar with these markings through the database maintained by the Federation's
Intergalactic Office of Military Protocol. As an old Klingon proverb says: "If
you want to prosper, remember to honor honor."

MO: When addressing someone of higher rank you may use the suffix {-neS}. It's
an honorific and is attached to the verb when showing deference. It's never
required. Here are some practical phrases:

HF: <I am honored to see you.>
MO: {qaleghneS.}
   {qaleghneS.}
   {...}

Be sure to get the vowel right in this suffix. It's {e}, {e} do not say {I}. If
you say {qaleghnIS} instead of {qaleghneS} you'll be saying <I need to see you>
instead of <I'm honored to see you.>

HF: <Your gunners are skilled, your honor.>
MO: {po'neS baHwI'pu'lI'.}
   {po'neS baHwI'pu'lI'.}
   {...}

HF: <Your wealth is impressive, your honor.>
MO: {DojneS mIplIj.}
   {DojneS mIplIj.}
   {...}

MO: If you are asking permission of a superior for something you could say:

HF: <Give me a permit to sell dilithium, your honor.>
MO: {cha'puj vIngevmeH chaw' HInobneS.}
   {cha'puj vIngevmeH chaw' HInobneS.}
   {...}

MO: Or, if you wanted to explain yourself, you could say:

HF: <Permit me to explain my mistake, your honor.>
MO: {QaghwIj vIQIj 'e' yIchaw'neS.}
   {QaghwIj vIQIj 'e' yIchaw'neS.}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [29:51] Use of the Standard Dialect #]]

MD: But the most obvious attention to honor by language is to speak the
Emperor's dialect. The visitor to the Klingon Empire must determine the dialect
of the current, or most recent, Emperor, as that dialect is, of course,
considered "Standard Klingon". There have been times in the Empire's history
when the standard dialect changed rather frequently, as the Emperor did. So it
is important to be certain whose dialect reigns. For Klingons language is a
weapon and an ally. Use the wrong dialect and you risk your reputation. Use the
correct dialect and you enhance your status.

MD: Suppose you are at a meal with both upper class, and working class Klingons,
such as a state dinner with officials and servants. Federation Standard is being
used with obvious relish but Klingon is clearly the language of actual
transaction. Everyone is well aware that, for them, *you* are the alien. You
wait for a slight pause in conversation and then, in a loud voice you could say:

MO: {ro'qegh'Iwchab HInob.}

MO: This simply means <Give me the Rokeg blood pie>, but it signifies that
you're well aware of the standard dialect. It also lets everyone know that you
know at least some Klingon, so they shouldn't try to get anything past you.
Remember to pause, ever so slightly, twice in the middle of the word for <Rokeg
blood pie>. It's {ro'qegh'Iwchab}, not {#roqeghIwchab#}.

MD: <Good.>
MO: {maj.}

MD: Let us try some other standard dialect phrases. First we will hear how this
sentence sounds in one of the nonstandard dialects, spoken in some remote parts
of the Empire. Use of this nonstandard dialect immediately indicates that the
speaker is from the less developed regions. Then we will hear the same sentence
in the standard dialect. All of the Klingon phrases on this tape are in the
standard dialect, but in the following phrases the difference is most notable.
Frequent use of these standard dialect phrases will highlight your recognition
of the status quo and will show that you are not from the hinterlands.

MO: Here is <Have you seen my phaser?> in the regional dialect:
   {#puhIchwIj Dalegbu.#}

[[Transcriber's note: I am uncertain as to whether this should be {#Dalegbu#} or
{#Dalegpu#}. This is similar, but not identical to, the Morskan dialect
(described in KGT "The Fiction of Klingon Conformity", pp.18-23), similarity is
the soft {H}, but KGT says nothing about {'} disappearing in Morskan, and in all
Morskan examples the {'} remain unchanged.]]

MO: And here it is in the standard dialect:
   {pu'HIchwIj Daleghpu'.} [[Daleghpu':=Daleghpu''a']]

[[Transcriber's note: This Klingon sentence is not a question at all, it's a
simple statement: <You have seen my phaser.> The interrogative suffix {-'a'} is
missing, the correct Klingon sentence here should be: {pu'HIchwIj
Daleghpu''a'.}]]

MO: Hear the difference? Try the standard dialect version again.
   {pu'HIchwIj Daleghpu'.} [[Daleghpu':=Daleghpu''a']]
   {pu'HIchwIj Daleghpu'.} [[Daleghpu':=Daleghpu''a']]
   {...}

MO: Now here is <I want eat meat> in the regional dialect: [[want eat:=want to eat]]
   {#hadba vISob vIne.#}

MO: And the standard dialect:
   {Ha'DIbaH vISop vIneH.}
   {Ha'DIbaH vISop vIneH.}
   {...}

MO: Again, note the sudden pause in the middle of the word for <meat>, in the
standard dialect it's {Ha'DIbaH}. The regional version is {#hadba#}. And
finally, this is...

MO: <What is that food?> Regional dialect:
   {#sojvets o nuk?#}

[[Transcriber's note: Morskan dialect. There is {#ts#} for {tlh} at the end of
syllables, no {H} at end of syllable and no {-'e'}. *Definitely* Morskan!]]

MO: Standard dialect:
   {Sojvetlh 'oH nuq'e'.}
   {Sojvetlh 'oH nuq'e'.}
   {...}

MD: Of course, before you go to the Empire, be sure to check on the ruling
Emperor. If a new Emperor is in power you may need to update these phrases with
the prevailing dialect. The Federation has an Office of Foreign Affairs, which
maintains files on language use, and we suggest contacting them before your
visit.

MD: Now, <Take a brief rest!>
MO: {loQ yIleS.}


   ==========================================
    SIDE TWO: [[36:30 Minutes Playing Time]]
   ==========================================

[[# Mark: [34:15] Replacement Proverbs #]]

MD: <Stop resting!>
MO: {bIleS 'e' yImev.}

MD: Social situations, especially those involving eating and drinking, are
extremely important occasions to assert yourself as an individual worthy of
respect. We have seen how you can assert yourself positively by some overt
display of the dominant dialect or by demonstrating allegiance to the ideals of
behavior. But you can also damage yourself irreparably if you fail to decisively
correct some social mistake. This is where knowledge of the replacement proverbs
is handy. The exact origin of the term "replacement proverbs" is obscure, but it
apparently has to do with the use of the proverbs to replace lost respect with
newly earned respect after one has been embarrassed in a public setting. It does
not really matter which proverb you use in any given embarrassing situation. All
of the proverbs relate to the restoration of credibility and so are used
interchangeably in many different situations.

MD: Suppose you are a guest at a state dinner. It is after the toasting and
first round of drinking, after the first course of <gagh>. The entrée of slimy
tongueballs is being served. On the way to your mouth three tongueballs slip out
of your fingers and hit the floor with loud splats. [[Sound effect: Three
splats]] Heads turn toward you in eager anticipation, thinking that a food fight
has begun. But they discover it is simply a bumbling Terran making a premature
mess. You have to recover or your reputation will not be worth a photon in a
solar wind. What can you do?

According to Klingon custom you must issue a proverb that allows you to regain
your respect. You grab the fallen food in your hands, stand up, and loudly say
one or more of the following replacement proverbs.

HM: <Set fire on the side when there is danger.>
MO: {DopDaq qul yIchenmoH, QobDI' ghu'.}
   {DopDaq qul yIchenmoH, QobDI' ghu'.}
   {...}

MO: *That* wasn't very convincing. Try it again, this time with more authority.
MO: {DopDaq qul yIchenmoH, QobDI' ghu'.}
   {DopDaq qul yIchenmoH, QobDI' ghu'.}
   {...}

Basically, this means that you have deliberately staged a diversion, or at least
you can shield your honor with such a pretense. Or you could say:

HM: <To defeat the enemy, be ready to fight alone.>
MO: {jagh DajeymeH, nIteb yISuvrup.}
   {jagh DajeymeH, nIteb yISuvrup.}
   {...}

MO: Here are some others:

HM: <A great warrior is always prepared.>
MO: {reH Suvrup SuvwI''a'.}
   {reH Suvrup SuvwI''a'.}
   {...}

HM: <The fire is always hotter on someone else's face.>
MO: {reH latlh qabDaq qul tuj law', Hoch tuj puS.}
   {reH latlh qabDaq qul tuj law', Hoch tuj puS.}
   {...}

HM: <Only fools laugh while warriors die.>
MO: {Hagh qoHpu' neH, HeghtaHvIS SuvwI'pu'.}
   {Hagh qoHpu' neH, HeghtaHvIS SuvwI'pu'.}
   {...}

And this final proverb refers to a Klingon devil-like creature known as the
<Fek'lhr>.

HM: <The Fek'lhr strikes again.>
MO: {HIvqa' veqlargh.}
   {HIvqa' veqlargh.}
   {...}

MD: You will know your credibility has been restored if the host and other
guests resume eating as if nothing had ever happened. If the silence and staring
continue, you have failed to regain control of the situation. If you have
failed, word will spread and from that point on you are a tourist and should
consider booking passage home.

[[# Mark: [39:10] Secrecy Proverbs #]]

Another set of proverbs also proves very useful in many kinds of situations.
They are known collectively as the "secrecy proverbs", probably because they are
most frequently used in situations where you want to show that you can keep a
secret under *any* conditions. We will go over the most common secrecy proverbs.

Suppose you want to buy some ion-ray triggers from a Klingon arms dealer on one
of the outer planets. The sale is perfectly legal, but skirmishes between
Ferengi and Klingons have broken out in a nearby sector and the dealer suspects
that if the location of his supply on this frontier is given away, a Ferengi
raiding party may take his entire stash. Before he takes you to his supply, he
must be reassured. You sense his heightened suspicions. The deal, and maybe your
life, depends on assuring him that you can keep a secret. You have already
clearly indicated through your choice of phrases that you know and respect the
ideals of behavior but accuracy, straightforwardness, aggressiveness, and
strength only indicate that you are a worthy opponent. What he now really wants
to know is if you are a worthy confidante. You need to show your capacity for
secrecy. What can you do?

Sensing your trust has been challenged you can flip out one of these "secrecy
proverbs" as confidently as one might flip on a cloaking device on the way to
battle.

HF: <A day without secrets is like a night without stars.>
MO: {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}
   {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}
   {...}

MO: That was about as energetic as a Tippernissian(?) flower going to seed. Now,
try again:
MO: {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}
   {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}
   {...}

MO: When you say {ghajbe'bogh}, which comes up twice in that phrase, be sure to
make the beginning and ending sounds nice and raspy: {gh}, {gh}, {gh}.
{ghajbe'bogh}

MO: Here's another:

HF: <No one eavesdrops at an open door.>
MO: {lojmIt poSDaq Daq pagh.}
   {lojmIt poSDaq Daq pagh.}
   {...}

MO: Try this one:

HF: <Knowledge of useful information may be unfortunate.>
MO: {De' lI' Sovlu'DI', chaq Do'Ha'.}
   {De' lI' Sovlu'DI', chaq Do'Ha'.}
   {...}

MO: And another:

HF: <Secrets never cease.>
MO: {not mev peghmey.}
   {not mev peghmey.}
   {...}

MO: And finally, one of the oldest of the secrecy proverbs:

HF: <The stars will talk before I will.>
MO: {jIjatlhpa' jatlh Hovmey.}
   {jIjatlhpa' jatlh Hovmey.}
   {...}

MD: <Good.>
MO: {maj.}

[[# Mark: [43:09] Holiday Proverbs #]]

MD: Proverbs are not the only socially useful sayings. There are also special
phrases, traditionally used on holidays. We will focus on two of the best known
holidays. One, which comes every tenth Klingon month, is {QI'lop}. {QI'lop}
celebrates the superiority of the Klingon military. Like most Klingon holidays
{QI'lop} is celebrated with much eating and drinking, but it is also marked by a
very peculiar custom. A guest brings a large dish of stuffed {to'baj} legs to a
host's house and in return is allowed to take any non-sacred item in the house.
The actual origin of this custom is obscure. Here are a few of the holiday
phrases:

[[Transcriber's note: The word {QI'lop} appears in KLI's list of new words and
there it's said to be "a guess as to what Michael Dorn was pronouncing". My
guess would rather have involved an {e} as the first vowel, and possibly {t}
instead of {'}, and maybe even {q} as the first letter. But then again, when it
is Dorn talking, it isn't exactly easy to hear the difference between {Q}/{q}
and {'}/{t}. I would think, however, that whoever did that list would know more
than me about Dorn's pronunciation. (But he can't be entirely sane though, since
he insists that the word {Qaw'} <destroy> is a noun. :-)]]

HM: <Accept these stuffed *tobbaj* legs.>
MO: {to'baj 'uS lughoDlu'bogh tIlaj.}
   {to'baj 'uS lughoDlu'bogh tIlaj.}
   {...}

HM: <I will take *that* to my home.>
MO: {juHwIjDaq Dochvetlh vItlhap.}
   {juHwIjDaq Dochvetlh vItlhap.}
   {...}

HM: <You have some stuffed *tobbaj* leg in your teeth.>
MO: {Ho'Du'lIjDaq to'baj 'uSHom lughoDlu'bogh tu'lu'.}
   {Ho'Du'lIjDaq to'baj 'uSHom lughoDlu'bogh tu'lu'.}
   {...}

HM: <Eat everything or you will die without honor.>
MO: {Hoch DaSopbe'chugh, batlh bIHeghbe'.}
   {Hoch DaSopbe'chugh, batlh bIHeghbe'.}
   {...}

MO: Of course, that last expression is not meant literally. It's roughly like
saying: "Eat! Eat!" Here are some others:

HM: <I will remember this dinner forever.>
MO: {reH 'uQvam vIqawtaH.}
   {reH 'uQvam vIqawtaH.}
   {...}

HM: <Between us, curses run like water.>
MO: {matay'DI', vIHtaHbogh bIQ rur mu'qaDmey.}
   {matay'DI', vIHtaHbogh bIQ rur mu'qaDmey.}
   {...}

MD: Practice these expressions, and during the next {QI'lop} holiday, use them.
You might also want to practice eating some stuffed {to'baj} legs.

[[# Mark: [46:04] Empire Union Day #]]

MD: Another well known holiday is Empire Union Day, which comes in the third
month. It celebrates the honor of Kahless the Unforgettable, who united the
Klingon homeworld. Here are some well known traditional phrases for Empire Union
Day:

HF: <May the Klingon Empire continue forever!>
MO: {reH tlhIngan wo' taHjaj.}
   {reH tlhIngan wo' taHjaj.}
   {...}

HF: <May the spirit of Kahless live within you!>
MO: {SoHDaq qeylIS qa' yInjaj.}
   {SoHDaq qeylIS qa' yInjaj.}
   {...}

HF: <May you encounter Kahless in your dreams!>
MO: {bInajtaHvIS, qeylIS Daghomjaj.}
   {bInajtaHvIS, qeylIS Daghomjaj.}
   {...}

HF: <Death before shame!>
MO: {bItuHpa', bIHeghjaj.}
   {bItuHpa', bIHeghjaj.}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [47:19] Rite of Ascension #]]

MD: The biggest personal holiday in the life of any young Klingon is, of course,
the coming of age ceremony, called <The Rite of Ascension> or the {nentay}. It
takes place in the seventh month of the young Klingon's fifteenth year. If you
are fortunate enough to be invited to a {nentay}, it is best to look over Dr.
Leopold Miklik's(?) book on the subject beforehand. Some of the rituals might
seem *unusual* to a Terran, such as the use of Klingon painstiks as a spiritual
test. But you will probably want to attend the ceremony, since your presence
will indicate you are a trustworthy Terran. To reinforce your position and
impress your host, you should know some of the ceremonial phrases that are
extended to his or her newly adult Klingon offspring.

MO: For a Klingon who has been through the Rite of Ascension, stand at
attention, touch your left shoulder with your right hand, and then quickly make
it into a fist in front of your chest. This should all be in one motion. You
then say the following, which means:

KM: <Today you are a warrior.>
MO: {DaHjaj SuvwI' SoH.}
   {DaHjaj SuvwI' SoH.}
   {...}

MO: Here are a couple of other phrases you might also use:

KM: <May you travel the river of blood.>
MO: {'Iw bIQtIqDaq bIlengjaj.}
   {'Iw bIQtIqDaq bIlengjaj.}
   {...}

KM: <You must show your heart!>
MO: {tIqlIj Da'angnIS.}
   {tIqlIj Da'angnIS.}
   {...}

KM: <May the bile of the vanquished fill your hands.>
MO: {jagh lucharghlu'ta'bogh HuH ghopDu'lIj lungaSjaj.}
   {jagh lucharghlu'ta'bogh HuH ghopDu'lIj lungaSjaj.}
   {...}

MD: <Good.>
MO: {maj.}

MD: And do not forget to bring some kind of weapon as a present for the new
adult.

MD: Now <Take a short pause!>
MO: {loQ yIyev.}

MD: <Stop pausing.>
MO: {bIyev 'e' yImev.}

[[# Mark: [49:52] Mating Ritual #]]

MO: Of course the most universal coming of age ceremony in any part of the
Galaxy, is the mating ritual. Except, of course, for one species reported to
live in the Beta quadrant, who mate with themselves -- any time they want. In
recent times the incidents of Terran--Klingon mating has been on the rise. We
offer a few useful phrases for those of you Terrans who are currently
considering, or might be approached about, such a coupling. First of all, it is
relatively easy to tell if a Klingon is interested in you as a potential mate.
There are no such things as pickup lines, small talk, or going together one
evening to some local antigravity bar. Instead, female Klingons slink around
like a Hellenian Mynx(?) and make sounds like the {chemvaH}. The Klingon male
will growl if interested, assuming the classic warrior stance: hands on waist
and feet slightly apart. These signs are unambiguous, and they derive from the
hasty mating that took place during battle. In a warring culture such as the
Empire's, there is rarely time for seduction or romance. If you find yourself
the target of such a pursuit and you are *not* interested, there are several
phrases which you can use to properly extinguish the flame. These are important
to remember, because in such a highly ritualized society the wrong response can
immediately turn a suitor into a combatant. The Federation has already received
several dozen reports of such fatalities, including one unfortunate tourist who
reportedly responded by *laughing*.

[[Transcriber's note: Helenian Mynx(?) or perhaps Hellenian Lynx(?) both have
been used on the tlhingan-hol mailing list.]]

MO: If you wish to discourage such attention by either a male or female Klingon,
turn your side to them, either right or left side will do, and say the
following. It means:

HM: <The blood of the warrior grows cold.>
MO: {bIrchoH SuvwI' 'Iw.}
   {bIrchoH SuvwI' 'Iw.}
   {...}

MO: Now, in most cases, that'll do the trick. If not, you could try to say the
following, which means:

HM: <I must wash my hair now.>
MO: {DaH jIbwIj vISay'nISmoH.}
   {DaH jIbwIj vISay'nISmoH.}
   {...}

MD: By this time the suitor should have resumed normal behavior again, as if
nothing had happened. In the rare instance that these two warnings do not
adequately diminish your pursuer's ardor, and you are still definitely
uninterested, we suggest you may want to check the shuttle schedule.

MD: If you *are* interested in reciprocating, or wish to initiate mating
proceedings, the first thing to do is to adopt one of the positions previously
mentioned, depending on your gender, and then utter the following nonverbal
phrase, indicating interest and availability.

MO: For a female, that means a low sound that's a cross between a growl and a
purr. Ready females? Repeat this:
KF: {#hghghghgh#}
   {#hghghghgh#}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: Initial <h> is a soft one, <gh> pronounced as usual. As
you can understand, this sound is somewhat hard to transcribe. To really grasp
it you'll *have to* listen to the tape.]]

MO: That was a little too much. Try once more.
KF: {#hhhghghghgh#}
   {#hhhghghghgh#}
   {...}

MO: <Good.> {maj.}

And males, whether you're responding or initiating, the sound is this:
KM: {#xxxxxhhh#}
   {#xxxxxhhh#}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: This simply doesn't fit within the Klingon romanized
transcription, so I can't transcribe it at all. This growling has its base
somewhere in the stomach region. -- This time you really *must* listen to the
tape to get it -- there is no other way.]]

MO: That won't even attract a targ in heat! Try again.

KM: {#XXXXXh#}
   {#XXXXXh#}
   {...}

[[Transcriber's note: Another untranscribable line.]]

MO: <Good.> {maj.}

MD: If the other party *is* interested, nature will have taken over by this time
and the rest is beyond the scope of this tape.

[[# Mark: [54:16] Clipped Klingon #]]

MD: As in the mating ritual, the Klingon battle ritual unfolds through an
accepted form of discourse and, given that Klingon society is constantly on a
war footing, it is entirely possible the long-term visitor will be placed in a
battle situation. Most Klingon language courses teach *proper* Klingon, and such
language is acceptable in many situations, but for battle situations the
prevailing speech is what is known as "clipped Klingon". In clipped Klingon
syllables or even entire words are left out. This manner of speaking evolved
through a long history of constant battle situations which demanded rapid
communication. Occasional use of such clipped phrases in everyday Klingon life
can only *increase* one's standing, as it indicates an allegiance to military
jargon. It could also indicate the urgency of a statement.

MO: Here is <Do you understand?> in proper Klingon:
   {bIyaj'a'?}
   {bIyaj'a'?}
   {...}

MO: And here's the clipped Klingon version, which means <Understood?>
   {yaj'a'?}
   {yaj'a'?}
   {...}

MO: Now, here are some other useful phrases, first in proper Klingon, then in
clipped Klingon:

HF: <I do not understand.>
MO: {jIyajbe'.}
   {jIyajbe'.}
   {...}

MO: And in clipped Klingon:
   {yajbe'.}
   {yajbe'.}
   {...}

HF: <Where is the bathroom?>
MO: {nuqDaq 'oH puchpa''e'?}
   {nuqDaq 'oH puchpa''e'?}
   {...}

MO: Clipped Klingon:
   {nuqDaq puchpa'?}
   {nuqDaq puchpa'?}
   {...}

HF: <How much fuel do we have left?>
MO: {nIn 'ar wIghaj?}
   {nIn 'ar wIghaj?}
   {...}

MO: Clipped Klingon:
   {nIn 'ar ghaj?}
   {nIn 'ar ghaj?}
   {...}

HF: <I am lost.>
MO: {DaqwIj vISovbe'.}
   {DaqwIj vISovbe'.}
   {...}

MO: Clipped Klingon:
   {DaqwIj Sovbe'.}
   {DaqwIj Sovbe'.}
   {...}

MO: And finally...

HF: <Where do I sleep?>
MO: {nuqDaq jIQong?}
   {nuqDaq jIQong?}
   {...}

MO: And the clipped Klingon:
   {nuqDaq Qong?}
   {nuqDaq Qong?}
   {...}

MD: Good question! Now we will <Take a short nap!>
MO: {loQ yIDum.}

MD: <Stop napping!>
MO: {bIDum 'e' yImev.}

[[# Mark: [57:45] Telling jokes #]]

MD: There is a saying that is popular on some Federation starships: "What is the
difference between a Klingon joke and phaser dental surgery?" The answer, of
course, is "nothing".

It is often said that Klingons have no sense of humor; this is not true. There
*is* a Klingon sense of humor, but from the point of view of most Federation
members it's simply is not funny. So when you are trying to lighten things up at
the local pub on Kronos, forget that howler about the Ferengi trying to buy
dilithium crystals. Instead, we suggest you memorize the following jokes. The
Terrans in their group may look at you like your ears have fallen off but the
Klingons will be on the floor, and you will once again enhance your status, this
time by being the *hit* of the party. Here is the first one:

HM: <Two Federation crewmen arrive on Kronos.>
MO: {Qo'noSDaq paw cha' DIvI' beq.}

HM: <They meet a Klingon guard.>
MO: {tlhIngan 'avwI' lughom.}

HM: <They ask him: "Can we get to the Great Hall from here?">
MO: {lutlhob; "naDevvo' vaS'a'Daq majaHlaH'a'?"}

HM: <The guard answers: "If the bugs do not bite you.">
MO: {jang 'avwI'; "lIchopbe'chugh ghewmey."}

MD: [chuckles] That is the end of that Klingon joke. Here is
another one: Memorize it!

HM: <Are warriors red?>
MO: {Doq'a' SuvwI'pu'?}

HM: <No. They are green.>
MO: {ghobe'. SuD.}

MD: There is one more to go: Memorize it!

HF: <A prisoner says to the guard: "I am hungry.">
MO: {'avwI'vaD jatlh qama'; "jIghung."}

HF: <The guard replies: "I am also hungry.">
MO: {jang 'avwI'; "jIghung je."}

HF: <The prisoner says: "I am thirsty.">
MO: {jatlh qama'; "jI'oj."}

HF: <The guard replies: "I am also thirsty.">
MO: {jang 'avwI'; "jI'oj je."}

HF: <The prisoner says: "I am very tired.">
MO: {jatlh qama'; "jIDoy'qu'."}

HF: <The guard says: "I am *not* tired.">
MO: {jatlh 'avwI'; "jIDoy'be'."}

MD: There is one good thing about Klingon humor: they *love* their jokes -- the
way other cultures love their music. They will listen with delight to the same
ones over and over again, so you need only remember these three jokes.

[[# Mark: [1:00:39] Addressing Pets #]]

MD: Finally, we come to a subject that is no laughing matter: how to talk to
your pets. It is becoming quite stylish for Terrans who are spending long
periods of time in the Empire to acquire native Klingon creatures as pets. This
is in spite of the fact that many of the creatures have strange smells, make
loud noises, and often eat live food. Most Klingon pets are considered difficult
to train. This reputation can probably be attributed to the fact that Terrans
frequently buy grown animals, previously trained by Klingon commands. So, here
are some common Klingon commands that will apply to a variety of creatures. As a
Terran attempting to maintain your social and economic position in a foreign
society, it is *essential* that you learn how to control your own pet, whether
it is an {'er} or a {Qogh}. Nothing will more quickly diminish your credibility
for strength, for instance, than the sight of you struggling with a targ who
refuses to move from a sitting position in the middle of a busy street.

MD: As with any standalone human command, these pet commands should be spoken
with great authority and should be preceded by the word {SuH}, which some
Klingon speakers pronounce as {#SSS#}. This sounds like the Federation Standard
expression "Sh!", which means to be quiet. But in Klingon this simply means that
the speaker is about to give a command. Here are the commands:

MD: Two warnings. First, *always* use clipped Klingon when addressing pets.
Second, if you have a Klingon pet who can hear this tape, you may want to put it
in another room now, before continuing. You do not want the poor animal to go
crazy, trying to obey *everything*.

MO: Here is the command for:

KM: <Sit!>
MO: {ba'!}
   {ba'!}
   {...}

KM: <Stand!>
MO: {Qam!}
   {Qam!}
   {...}

KM: <Come here!>
MO: {naDev ghoS!}
   {naDev ghoS!}
   {...}

KM: <Eat!>
MO: {Sop!}
   {Sop!}
   {...}

KM: <Stop eating!>
MO: {Sop 'e' mev!}
   {Sop 'e' mev!}
   {...}

HM: <Attack!>
MO: {HIv!}
   {HIv!}
   {...}

HM: <Bite his leg off!>
MO: {'uSDaj chop! chev!}
   {'uSDaj chop! chev!}
   {...}

HM: <Bite *her* leg off!>
MO: {'uSDaj chop! chev!}
   {'uSDaj chop! chev!}
   {...}

MO: Notice that there's no difference in Klingon between <his> and <her>.

HM: <Chew that arm!>
MO: {DeSvetlh yIv!}
   {DeSvetlh yIv!}
   {...}

HM: <Do not do that!>
MO: {mev!}
   {mev!}
   {...}

HM: <Get off that transporter control panel!>
MO: {jol SeHlaw lItHa'!}
   {jol SeHlaw lItHa'!}
   {...}

HF: <Bring that here!>
MO: {naDev Dochvetlh qem!}
   {naDev Dochvetlh qem!}
   {...}

HF: <I really mean it this time: bring that here!>
MO: {naDev Dochvetlh qemqu'!}
   {naDev Dochvetlh qemqu'!}
   {...}

HF: <Bad! Bad animal!>
MO: {qab! Ha'DIbaH qab!}
   {qab! Ha'DIbaH qab!}
   {...}

HF: <Do not lick my forehead!>
MO: {QuchwIj roSQo'!}
   {QuchwIj roSQo'!}
   {...}

[[# Mark: [1:05:17] Example Dialogues #]]

MD: Finally we will hear several scenes that demonstrate how a Terran might use
everything we have learned on this tape in the course of a single day, beginning
with a business deal, then toasts at a bar, a brief bout of curse warfare,
dinner at the house of a prominent Klingon on Empire Union Day, a mating ritual
overture, confronting a pet, and telling a Klingon joke.

[[# Mark: [1:05:46] A business deal (dialogue) #]]

KM: <What do you want?>
MO: {nuqneH?}

HM: <I definitely want sixty ion triggers.>
MO: {javmaH tat chu'wI' vIneHbej.}

KM: <Give me five thousand credits! Pay now!>
MO: {vaghSaD DeQ HInob! DaH yIDIl!}

HM: <No problem! Here!>
MO: {qay'be'! tItlhap!}

KM: <Good. Let us go get a drink.>
MO: {maj. Ha'! DaH matlhutlh.}

[[# Mark: [1:06:31] Toasting (dialogue) #]]

HM: <Waiter, I will drink Romulan ale.>
MO: {jabwI', romuluS HIq vItlhutlh.}

KM: <Waiter, bring two glasses! -- You are an unusual Terran.>
MO: {jabwI', cha' HIvje' tIqem! tera'ngan motlhbe' SoH.}

HM: <May your blood scream.>
MO: {'IwlIj jachjaj.}

KM: <May you always find a bloodworm in your glass.>
MO: {reH HIvje'lIjDaq 'Iwghargh Datu'jaj.}

[[# Mark: [1:07:07] Curse warfare (dialogue) #]]

HM: <Curse warfare has definitely begun.>
MO: {taghbej mu'qaD veS.}

KF: <Your targ has a bigger brain than all your ancestors put together.>
MO: {targhlIj yab tIn law', no'lI' Hoch yabDu' tIn puS.}

KM: <You belong in a black hole in the netherworld.>
MO: {ghe''orDaq luSpet 'oH DaqlIj'e'.}

HM: <Your mother has a smooth forehead.>
MO: {Hab SoSlI' Quch.}

[[From the surprised crowd of Klingons:]] Ohhh!

[[# Mark: [1:07:45] Empire Union Day (dialogue) #]]

HM: <It would be an honor to eat twice here at your house, your honor. I am very
hungry.>
MO: {naDev juHlIjDaq cha'logh vISopneSchugh, vaj jIquv. jIghungqu'.}

HM: <May the spirit of Kahless live within you.>
MO: {SoHDaq qeylIS qa' yInjaj.}

[[# Mark: [1:08:09] Confronting a pet (dialogue) #]]

[[Repeated growling noises from some kind of dog like animal.]]

HM: <Your {Qogh} is definitely fierce. Do not do that! Sit!>
MO: {qu'bej QoghlIj. #SSS!# mev! ba'!}

[[The animal whines, then becomes silent. Klingons in the background make
approving sounds.]]

MO: {yoH tera'ngan. majQa'.}
   [[<The Terran is brave. Very good.>]]

KM: <You follow Klingon customs well.>
MO: {tlhIngan tIgh Dapabchu'.}

[[# Mark: [1:08:37] Secrecy proverbs (dialogue) #]]

KM: <I have secret information, you will find it useful. We will talk after
dinner.>
MO: {De' pegh vIghaj. lI', 'e' Datu'. 'uQ vISoppu'DI' maja'chuq.}

HM: <A day without secrets is like a night without stars.>
MO: {Hov ghajbe'bogh ram rur pegh ghajbe'bogh jaj.}

[[# Mark: [1:09:01] Replacement proverbs (dialogue) #]]

[[A tray crashes to the floor. The crowd becomes silent. The Terran obviously
talks to himself saying:]]
HM: Uhm. Oh. Oh, great. Er. Urhm!

HM: <The fire is always hotter on someone else's face.>
MO: {reH latlh qabDaq qul tuj law' Hoch tuj puS.}

[[The background noise resumes, and the Terran relaxes with a sigh.]]

[[# Mark: [1:09:23] A mating ritual overture (dialogue) #]]

[[A female approaches.]]

KF: <Terran, ahggrrrrr... Hggrrr... Do I please you?>
MO: {tera'ngan, qabelmoH'a'?}

[[Transcriber's note: It's a bit of an anticlimax to hear Marc Okrand's voice
say this in Klingon, after listening to that -- Hgggrrr... -- female voice.]]

HM: <The blood of the warrior grows cold.>
MO: {bIrchoH SuvwI' 'Iw.}

[[The female whines and groans, then departs.]]

[[# Mark: [1:08:47] Telling a joke (dialogue) #]]

KM: <Guest, do you know any funny stories?>
MO: {meb, lut tlhaQ DaSov'a'?}

HM: <Two Federation crewmen arrive on Kronos. They meet a Klingon guard. They
ask him: "Can we get to the Great Hall?">
MO: {Qo'noSDaq paw cha' DIvI' beq. tlhIngan 'avwI' lughom. lutlhob; "naDevvo'
vaS'a'Daq majaHlaH'a'?"}

[[The Klingon crowd laughs, starting after {lutlhob}.]]

[[Transcriber's note: Whatever happened to the punch line?]]

[[# Mark: [1:10:31] Afterword #]]

MD: This concludes the tape on <Power Klingon>. Go back to the beginning, and
listen through again and again until you feel competent enough to issue these
useful words and phrases with authority. Just as the technical mastery of a
phaser must be followed by an instinctual mastery of when to use it, so these
lessons must be mastered in both technique and use. Only then will you be able
to wield your newfound weapons.

MD: <It has been an honor to instruct you. Success!>
MO: {batlh qaghojmoH. Qapla'.}

[[# Mark: [1:11:12] Credits #]]

HM: <Power Klingon> was written by Barry Levine with Marc Okrand. It was read by
Michael Dorn, with additional narration by Marc Okrand, Allen Brown(?), Sam
Gunsler(?) and Jessica Weglein(?). The recording engineer was Leszek Wójcik,
with editing and post-production by Paul Goodrich(?). The associate producer was
Linda Wollman. <Power Klingon> was directed and produced by Susan Perrin
Totland.

[[eof]]
